Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY
AGD-1
LOW ALTITUDE AWARENESS
TRAINING (LAAT)

MARCH 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_10.jpeg:
Mission Critical Tasks

The dynamic and varied nature of missions dictates mission tasks to be
general in nature, with a “floating” priority (Figure D-3). The four tasks are
situational awareness, navigation, threat, and the aggregation of command,
control, and communication.

COMMAND, CONTROL,
COMMUNICATION

THREAT

FLOATING
PRIORITY

NAVIGATION
SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS

AGD-01-03

Figure D - 3. Mission Critical Tasks.

Situational awareness (SA), for this course, is the task management process
that controls the sorting and sequencing of mission critical tasks. It is also
the cognitive link between mission and terrain clearance tasks.

Navigation is a single term for everything from time, distance and heading,
to visual acquisition of a turn point or target.

Threat is everything from the use of the tactical electronic warning system
(TEWS) and electronic countermeasures (ECM) to terrain masking and
reacting to an engagement.

Command, control and communication (C*) includes the “routine” chores from
flying formation and communication (radios or otherwise) with your flight
members or air traffic controllers, to getting “bullseye” calls from AWACS or
instructions from FACs.

AGD-1 D-4


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_11.jpeg:
Mission tasks encompass such things as simple switch changes to complex
mental interpretation and calculation. The internal hierarchy is fluid
depending upon phase and complexity of the mission. It is important for the
crew to distinguish between critical and noncritical tasks, and imperative
that a crew never drop a critical task for a noncritical task (Figure D-4).

Legend: TCT = Terrain Clearance Tasks
MCT = Mission Critical Tasks
NCT = Noncritical Tasks

NOTE

Any combination of TCT + MCT + NCT greater than 100% creates a task
overload situation.

TASK
OVERLOAD

Sas PERCENTAGE
OFTIME ie vad

0%
SYSTEM TARGETING TERRAIN TEWS TERRAIN REDUCED
UPDATE THREAT MASKING VIS (SMOKE & FIRE)

AGD-01-04

Figure D - 4. Task Management and AGL.

D-5 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_12.jpeg:
How Low Can You Go?

Minimum altitude (MA) is determined by the crew’s finite capability to do
nothing other than terrain clearance tasks (TCTs); i.e., fly low (Figure D-5).
The altitude varies with aircraft configuration, crew proficiency, weather,
terrain, etc. No mission tasks are accomplished.

NON TCT

LOW ALT
ENVIRON-
MENT

CRITICAL
TASKING
ALTITUDE

MINIMUM
ALTITUDE

GROUND
TASKING AGL

MISSION TIME
AGD-01-05

Figure D - 5. Task Management and AGL.

The lowest altitude at which you can accomplish your mission is known as
your critical tasking altitude (CTA). In a crew aircraft the prior coordination
of critical tasks may allow CTA to equal MA. CTA varies with mission
complexity, systems degradation, environment, proficiency, etc.

When operating above CTA, time is available for noncritical tasks. Once
terrain clearance tasks fall out of your basic cross-check you are no longer

operating at low altitude. It is this hierarchy which determines “how low you

can go.”

AGD-1 D-6


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_13.jpeg:
This floating priority of mission tasks never applies to terrain clearance
tasks. Avoiding the ground is a function of physics; accomplishing the
mission is a function of interpretation. Figure D-6 is a graphic depiction of
low altitude task priorities.

LEAST IMPORTANT
NONCRITICAL TASKS

MISSION CRITICAL TASKS

TERRAIN CLEARANCE

TASKS
MOST IMPORTANT

AGD-01-06

Figure D - 6. Consolidated Low Altitude Task Priorities.

D-7 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_14.jpeg:
AGD-1

QUESTIONS
Which maneuver(s) created the highest percentage of accidents?

Straight and level
Vertical maneuvers
Turning and looking
Unknown

po op

What is the crew’s primary responsibility during low altitude
training?

a. Terrain clearance tasks

b. Mission tasks

c. Navigating and timing

d. Flying good tactical formation

Which terrain clearance task has the highest priority?

Vector control
AGL control
Time control
Aircraft control

Bo op

What are the four mission tasks?

po op


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_15.jpeg:
ANSWERS

a
d

situational awareness, navigation, threat and C®

D-9 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_16.jpeg:
LOW ALTITUDE PHYSICS

The purpose of this section on low altitude physics is to cover the dynamics of
maneuvering flight. Understanding these principles will help you to know:

@ = what to look for,

@ = when to look for it,

@ where to find it, and

@ how to use it.
Straight and Level

Straight and level is the dominant maneuver during low altitude flying. To
properly establish reasonable mission cross-check time, first determine the
time to impact (TTD for typical deviations. First, the time to impact is
directly dependent on the beginning AGL. If you double the beginning AGL
from 100-200 feet AGL, you double the time to impact. It is just the opposite
for TAS; double your speed, cut your time in half. Finally, time to impact
varies approximately inversely with small changes (up to 4°) in the flight
path angle. Double your flight path angle, cut your time to impact in half. In
terms of typical AGLs, speeds, and flight path angles, Figure D-7 depicts
common values. It becomes obvious that the basic variables for straight and
level are AGL and speed. Straight and level flight allows relatively long
mission cross-check times of 3-5 seconds at 100-300 feet AGL over flat,
predictable terrain. However, anymore than 3 seconds at 100 feet AGL is
unacceptable. Five seconds is acceptable anywhere above 300 feet AGL. If
the pilot ever looks away from the vector for more than five continuous
seconds, at or above 300 feet, the deviations become unpredictable. The same
holds true for 3 seconds at 100 feet. These rules of thumb provide plenty of
mission cross-check time for critical tasks without allowing an excessive
deviation to develop.

AGD-1 D-10


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_17.jpeg:
TIME (IN SECONDS) TO IMPACT

FPA = -1° FPA = -2°
480KTS  240KTS 480KTS  240KTS

NOTE: DOUBLE AGL, THEN DOUBLE TTI
DOUBLE YOUR FPA, THEN HALVE YOUR TTI
DOUBLE AIRSPEED, THEN HALVE YOUR TTI

AGD-01-07

Figure D - 7. Straight and Level Time to Impact Values.

The crew must learn to break up critical and noncritical tasks into 3-5 second
chunks as opposed to counting on a 5+ second mission cross-check time.

Thus, straight and level is a very stable maneuver which allows ample
mission cross-check time even at 100 AGL and serves as the basic low
altitude reference. Because a vast majority of low altitude flying is straight
and level, it is easy to become very comfortable at a given AGL. The difficult
part of low altitude flying is the constant time control, and the fact that
inherent stability of straight and level sets the crew up for a serious timing
mistake in turns and, to some degree, in vertical maneuvers. Low altitude
can also lead to disaster in straight and level flight if deviations attributable
to visual illusions or terrain contour are not detected.

D-11 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_18.jpeg:
Wings Level Bunt

Since you spend the majority of your time straight and level, pacing is based
on its dynamics. The real danger is that once you vary G, bank, or dive angle
all the familiar timing references no longer apply. Straight and level sets you
up for trouble, since it is where you develop a comfort level. While flying
straight and level, a common maneuver is a wings level near zero G bunt. It
is used to increase speed, or lower your vector for a descent, and works nicely
on the back of some ridgelines. The bunt is significantly different than the
straight and level situation because you are intentionally accelerating your
body toward the ground. At 480 knots with zero G you may feel or perceive
yourself as floating, but you are actually accelerating toward the ground,
with a forward TAS. The altitude lost is equal to one-half the acceleration
times the square of the time. This means in three seconds you lose nine
times the altitude you lost in the first second. Airspeed determines flight
path angle during the duration of the bunt. The faster you go, the less the
nose drops. This makes the altitude loss much less obvious from the cockpit
at high speeds; so be aware of the rapid, yet insidious, descents.

Figure D-8 shows the resulting aircraft positions for zero G bunts at 240 and
480 knots. In both cases, the bunt is held for the same amount of time, and
both lose the same altitude, but their forward velocity is different. The result
is different flight path angles after the same time.

AGD-01-08

Figure D - 8. Wings Level Zero G Bunt, Flight Path Angle.

AGD-1 D-12


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_19.jpeg:
To provide some specific times for calculating mission cross-check time,
Figure D-9 shows some typical impact times for the zero G bunts. Again,
notice that airspeed does not affect time to impact. The wings level bunt
loses altitude very rapidly, and therefore, should be fully monitored by both
crew members, if possible.

TIME (IN SECONDS) TO IMPACT

480 KTS

NOTE: AIRSPEED HAS NO EFFECT ON TTI

AGD-01-09

Figure D - 9. Wings Level Bunt Time to Impact (Zero G).

Unlike straight and level, which requires only 30-50 feet to stop a 1° descent
(about 1.5 seconds prior to impact), the bunts need to be stopped and recovery
started before 50% of the time to impact is used up. In this case, the crew
can hold a zero G bunt from 500 feet AGL for only a little over 2.5 seconds
before a recovery must be started. The caution is one of ensuring the pilot
controls the duration of the bunt (time control) and limits the maximum dive
angle achieved to -10° (as a rule of thumb).

D-18 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGD-1, March, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_20.jpeg:
LOW ALTITUDE MANEUVERS
Vertical Maneuvers

Vertical maneuvers include three basic types: steady state dives, high-low
transitions, and low-high-low pop-ups. The tactical applications include long
steady descents from high altitude, base position roll-ins for weapons
delivery, slices for low altitude intercepts, and pop-ups for minimum exposure
weapons delivery. Unlike straight and level, the vertical maneuvers are used
to intentionally lower the AGL and involve flight path angles from -5° to as
steep as -90°.

There are three rules to ensure safe vertical maneuvering over a wide range
of tactical situations. The “dive recovery rules” are used for the steady state
descents. The “50% rule” is used for the high-low transitions. The “10° rule”
is used for the low-high-low maneuvers. When properly applied, these rules
allow the crew to exploit the full maneuvering envelope with the least
amount of terrain clearance tasking, which allows more concentration on
mission critical tasking.

AGD-1 D-14


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_21.jpeg:
Dive Recovery Rules

As a basic rule, to descend a few hundred feet, use a negative flight path
angle equal to the desired altitude loss in hundreds of feet. For example, to
lose 400 feet, use a -4° flight path angle and monitor the altimeter and visual
cues for recovery. This simple relationship works well up to the 5° descent
where the “dive recovery rule” AGL should be used. Dive recovery rules, used
for steady state descents, are simply five AGL and flight path angle
combinations which determine when to start a recovery to level flight to
ensure ground clearance (Figure D-10). For those that routinely drop bombs,
some of the numbers are familiar. For those not accustomed to pointing the
nose of the aircraft at the ground, they seem low. After the pilot gains
proficiency with the HUD and radar altimeter cross-check required for this
maneuver, the crew finds that their terrain clearance tasks required for rapid
descents to low altitude are significantly reduced, freeing more mission
cross-check time. In practice, a 10° descent is best in terms of balancing
rapid descents with ease of cross-check.

FLIGHT PATH ANGLE START RECOVERY AGL
(DEGREES) (FEET)

250
-10 500

750
1000
1500

¢ ASSUMPTIONS:
- SPEED BETWEEN 450 KTAS AND 560 KTAS
- ONLY A 1.5 SECOND BUFFER IS INCLUDED
- MINIMUM ONSET AND PULL OUT IS 4 Gs IN 2 SECONDS
- LOWEST RECOVERY AGL IS 100 FEET

AGD-01-10

Figure D - 10. Dive Recovery Rules.

D-15 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_22.jpeg:
50% Rule

For high-low transitions, use the 50% rule to find the maximum safe flight
path angle for a 90° turning roll-in. The flight path angle is equal to 50% of
the preroll-in AGL in hundreds of feet (Figure D-11). For example, if the
crew’s current AGL is 4000 feet, they can safely accomplish a 90° roll-in to a
maximum of a 20° dive. If their AGL were 2000 feet, 10° would be the
maximum. This rule can easily be applied to repositioning on a target from a
pop-up or rolling in on a tactical target from a wheel pattern. Obviously,
because of the variability associated with roll-in techniques, this rule is not
as precise as the dive recovery rules. The 50% rule ensures that by the time
the crew establishes the calculated flight path angle, they are at or above the
“dive recovery rule” AGL for that flight path angle. If you turn less than 90°,
you have a bigger buffer. If you turn more than 90°, you may have no buffer
and may end up below the dive recovery AGL. Note that the 50% rule does
not take into account safe escape, fuzing, or weaponeering considerations—
only ground clearance.

20° DIVES”

chon iene irae

AGD-01-11

Figure D- 11. 50% Rule.

AGD-1 D-16


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_23.jpeg:
10° Rule

The 10° rule applies to the low-high-low maneuvering such as vertical jinks
over flat terrain. It can be used without any reference to altitude because it
relies on the control of time and geometry to ensure terrain clearance. It is
dead reckoning through the vertical. Simply stated, the 10° rule is start
rollout at or before a dive angle equal to your highest observed climb angle
minus 10°, and start pullout at or before a time equal to the time spent in the
climb. For example in Figure D-12, the climb flight path angle is equal to 20°
and the climb is held for five seconds. The rollout from the inverted pull at
the top is started at 10° of dive angle (climb angle minus 10), and the nose
drops an additional 5° during the roll. The descent is held for five seconds
(equal to the time in the climb), and then the dive pullout is accomplished to
level flight.

INVERTED
ROLL INVERTED

PULL
5 SEC Ny i

PULL TO +20 FPA

AGD-01-12

Figure D - 12. 10° Rule Example.

D-17 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_24.jpeg:
The 10° rule allows unlimited tactical use of the vertical maneuvering
envelope of the aircraft while ensuring safe terrain clearance, because the
descent is 5° less than the climb, making it an altitude gaining maneuver.
However, there are several factors which define its limits. The first factor is
the rate of pull-up and pull-down. To preserve the geometry-time
relationship, the inverted pull-down must always be equal to or faster than
the pull-up. The second factor is the airspeed during the maneuver.
Obviously, if you are slower during the descent than the climb, you will have
more buffer; faster during the descent, less buffer. Third, the rule is based on
the same assumptions for the pullout as the dive recovery rules. Safe
recovery is ensured if the pilot executes the pullout the same. Fourth, the
rule assumes level terrain during the maneuver. If the terrain is
significantly higher during the pull-down (rising terrain, for example), there
may not be adequate altitude to recover. As you can see, time control is
imperative. Simply add extra time to the climb portion of the maneuver to
give yourselves more buffer, making room for more mission cross-check time.

Turns

The final category of low altitude maneuvering is the turn. The time to
impact for the level turn is the same as the zero G wings level bunt with an
added bank angle calculation which magnifies the vertical component.
However, there is a distinct difference between the 90° bank and the zero G
wings level bunt. First, it is extremely difficult to perceive that you are
falling when you have 4, 5, 6, or even 9 positive Gs on your body. Therefore,
your ability to catch an error by any means other than visual is hampered.
The second difference, and by far the most significant, is the bank angle
sensitivity. Even very small bank angle deviations of 5° or 10° dramatically
reduce time to impact for turns when compared to straight and level times to
impact at the same AGL. Once 90° is exceeded you are “pulling” toward the
ground. A 10° overbank is considered as the “typical” deviation. Figure D-13
lists the time to impact for several turns ranging from 2-6 Gs. The first bank
angle is that required for a level turn and the second bank angle, in
parentheses, includes the 10° overbank.

AGD-1 D-18


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_25.jpeg:
The values in Figure D-13 illustrate the importance of controlling the bank
angle and G combination. This table also shows the effects of the
acceleration toward the ground as the bank angle and G increase. With a 10°
overbank, the time to impact values are essentially the same for any turn of
3 Gs or more. The bottom line—turning and looking is a death act.

TIME (IN SECONDS) TO IMPACT

6G

100 AGL

300 AGL

500 AGL

NOTE: THE NUMERIC VALUES ARE FOR THE 10° OVERBANK
IN PARENTHESIS

AGD-01-13

Figure D - 13. Time to Impact, Level Turn with 10° Overbank.

D-19 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_26.jpeg:
Figure D-14 provides a more useful side-by-side comparison for deviations
from straight and level flight and level turns by comparing the actual time to
impact along with the point of recovery. This comparison shows the stability
of straight and level flight while showing the instability of turning
maneuvers.

TIME (IN SECONDS) TO IMPACT/TIME TO RECOVER

STRAIGHT AND LEVEL 4G LEVEL TURN
(-1° DEVIATION) (+10° OVERBANk)

21/19.5 4.5/2.3
35 / 33.5 5.8/2.9

NOTE: TABLE IS COMPARING TTI FOR DEVIATIONS FROM
STRAIGHT AND LEVEL VS DEVIATIONS FROM LEVEL
TURNS AND SHOWS TIME TO LAST CHANCE
RECOVERY POINT

AGD-01-14

Figure D - 14. Straight and Level Flight Versus Level Turn.

AGD-1 D - 20


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_27.jpeg:
The mission cross-check times for straight and level have been capped at a
maximum of five seconds. The values in Figure D-15 represent the desired
values; any less and the crew is adding protection (but limiting their mission
time); any added time and they are jeopardizing their safety. With proper
training in task management, the mission can be accomplished safely within
these time constraints.

TIME (IN SECONDS) FOR CROSS-CHECKING

STRAIGHT AND LEVEL 4G LEVEL TURN
PCE DEVIATION ° DEVIATION) | (F10" OVERBANK) 0° OVERBANK)

Figure D - 15. Mission Cross-check Time Comparison.

AGD-01-15

D-21 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_28.jpeg:
VISUAL PERCEPTION: OPTICAL FLOW

Optical flow is based on the way objects flow below, around, and past the
crew’s eyes as they fly the aircraft over and around the terrain. From this
information, their visual perception system interprets their rate and direction
of motion. Optical flow is also a function of each object’s location relative to
the aircraft’s velocity vector and the distance to the object. In flight terms
this means the crew’s flight path angle, speed, AGL, and slant range to each
object projected over time. Optical flow can be applied to each of the basic
low altitude maneuvers.

Straight and Level

For straight and level (Figure D-16), objects flow back in a symmetrical
pattern with those directly under the velocity vector dropping in elevation
only under the aircraft. Objects to the side move in both elevation and
azimuth under and away from the aircraft. Objects directly inside the
velocity vector do not move in either elevation or azimuth; if you wait until
they get to the aircraft, you hit them. Those that are either dropping or
flowing outward, you will miss, at least with your eyes.

AGD-01-16

Figure D - 16. Straight and Level Optical Flight.

AGD-1 D - 22


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_29.jpeg:
Fortunately, optical flow in straight and level is very sensitive to AGL for a
given speed. As you lower the AGL in straight and level, the optical flow
increases, and you quickly sense an increase in “speed rush,” telling you that
you are getting lower. Initially this works well, but the eye is so adaptive, it
quickly accommodates to any given situation and sets a new relative
reference for detecting changes. This phenomena is called the “speed rush
baseline” because it establishes a relative optical flow reference from which
subsequent perceptual evaluations of AGL and speed are created. It takes
about 30 seconds to 1 minute to establish a new reference, and therefore as
the pilot flies, the perceptual tendency is to get lower and lower, or feel safer
and safer at the same AGL. This could lead to complacency or too much
mission cross-check time, and eventually striking the ground, because it
diverts attention from the primary job of terrain clearance tasks. Therefore,
bring in the absolute reference of a radar altimeter, or suitable substitute, to
periodically “cage your eyeballs” during the straight and level maneuvers.
Further, a visual cross-check should concentrate on the area just below the
HUD velocity vector and look for those objects that are not dropping in
elevation. This area is highlighted in Figure D-17. If you detect an obstacle
starting to fill the HUD, pull instinctively; there is no time for detailed
analysis.

AGD-01-17

Figure D - 17. Where to Look During Straight and Level.

D - 23 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY

i)
SSS es)
po oe ed

COVER

LOW ALTITUDE AWARENESS TRAINING (LAAT

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with the low altitude
environment. It provides you with information on the risks associated
with low altitude, and develops a system of task management to allow you
to minimize those risks. It helps you develop or refine your judgement
based on a thorough understanding of low altitude physics, visual
perceptions and illusions, environmental considerations, and basic rules of
thumb for use in low altitude flying.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeecceesseeeesneeceseeeeesaeecesaeeeessaeeessaeeessaeesessaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeseeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
CEE os ses sans sos cores nos nas ois cua cares canis ans as RSA SNS Onis aU KUNE kK NewS SHES KoRKG MU NaS HSS aUD KR D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ ou. ececcccesseeecesneeceesaeecesacesensaeecesaeeseseeeenaees E-1
(ina) F-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_30.jpeg:
In summary, for straight and level you need to know the following:
@ What to look for—terrain not moving at the velocity vector.
@ When to look for it—every 3-5 seconds depending upon AGL.
@ Where to find it—in the HUD, at or below the velocity vector.
@ How to use it—climb.

Vertical Maneuvers

For the vertical maneuver analysis, a 20° dive represents a good example and
is depicted in Figure D-18. When in a dive, everything expands or flows
outward from the impact point/velocity vector. Unfortunately, the rate of
movement—the only thing the crew can see—gets slower the steeper the dive.
Yet the steeper the dive, the faster you are going toward the ground and the
sooner the pilot needs to pull out. This presents a real problem and makes

accurate visual dive recoveries unreliable. This is what makes vertical
maneuvering dangerous.

As the climb and dive angles of the vertical maneuver increase, the visual
capability to warn the crew of the dangers decreases, unlike straight and

level. This explains the 11:1 ratio in fatalities to exposure for the vertical
maneuvers.

Sara Reval
oi
|e)
f coi — 2 *
7 oe oy =a e's) rie, a
“Hi . a es 50) ale of 2
tae B. © 6. IIIS) .2."(- (O} an
i we rf Ol LIE (5) ’ "
2 " [ ° Q A O59 4 et % ; | t ee
a ae : a CC] B a: © we ie 7
— eo" | .

AGD-01-18

Figure D - 18. Vertical Maneuver Optical Flow.

AGD-1 D - 24


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_31.jpeg:
Cues for Detecting Deviations

As already mentioned, optical flow for dive recoveries is insufficient. The
crew must react based on actual dive angle and present AGL. Both are
available in the HUD (this assumes radar altimeter is selected or you are
aware of the area MSL). The crew needs to then apply the dive recovery

rules taught earlier or dive recovery techniques presented in TO 1F-15E-1-1,
Figures A9-17 through A9-20.

Vertical maneuvering summary:
@ What to look for—dive angle and AGL altitude.
@ When to look for it—continuously during steady state dives.
@ Where to find it—in the HUD.
@ How to use it—compare flight conditions with established dive

recovery rules or emergency recovery procedures as appropriate
until intercepting dive recovery rules.

D- 25 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_32.jpeg:
Turns

Figure D-19 shows optical flow in a turn. Objects well outside of the crew’s
turn radius flow parallel to the horizon to the outside of their turn. Those
just outside flow laterally to the outside, but also drop in elevation and pass
the outside wing. The objects on your ground track move laterally but into
the canopy structure and simultaneously drop down in elevation to pass
directly under the aircraft. These objects all pass directly through the HUD
as explained earlier. The objects inside the turn also move laterally and drop
in elevation, but they drop faster in elevation and stop the lateral movement
before reaching the canopy structure and pass off the inside wing.

AGD-01-19

Figure D - 19. Turning Optical Flow.

AGD-1 D - 26


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_33.jpeg:
Figure D-20 provides a vertical (God’s eye) view of a constant G level turn.
The velocity vector represents a line (A) tangent to the turn radius. This
shows where the aircraft ground track would be if you rolled out of the turn.

NOTE: TIMES ARE SECONDS
"INTO TURN" 4 Gs,
480 KNOTS
GROUND SPEED

AGD-01-20

Figure D - 20. Vertical View of a Level Turn.

As seen from the cockpit, this line is represented by the HUD velocity vector.
The curved line (B) represents the projected ground track for the turn
assuming the G, bank angle, and airspeed are held constant. By calculating
the turn rate, a time of arrival can be determined for each point along the
ground track. The times for a 4 G, 480 knot level turn are plotted and labeled
in Figure D-20 as tic marks along the ground track. Thus, if an object were
sticking up at point (C), you would hit it in approximately 2.0 seconds, if you
did not roll out partially toward the velocity vector or tighten the turn.

D-27 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_34.jpeg:
By using the velocity vector as a reference and adding in the angle of attack
for the G and airspeed, the positions of several cockpit references can be
overlaid on Figure D-20. For example, the line from the pilot’s eye point in
the cockpit to the canopy bow projected out to the horizon intersects your
projected ground track at point (D) or about the 3.5 second point in the turn.

In other words, your ground track for the next 3.5 seconds is visible between
the velocity vector (0 seconds) and the canopy bow (3.5 seconds) at 4 Gs and
480 knots ground speed.

If the pilot scans from the velocity vector to the canopy bow, he is checking
the next 3.5 seconds of the ground track (Figure D-21). This is well within
any of the mission cross-check times for the level turn. The pilot’s eyes are
pointed in the optimal spot for seeing nose slice and provides easy
interpretation of the HUD velocity vector for precise control of the level turn.
If a hard-to-see object “pops up” under the canopy bow but before the velocity
vector, the pilot should roll out and let it pass to the inside of the turn. The
top of the HUD combining glass provides a 2.0 second warning.

CANOPY BOW (3.5 SEC)

TOP OF HUD (2.0 SEC)

AGD-01-21

Figure D - 21. Cockpit View of Level Turn.

AGD-1 D - 28


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_35.jpeg:
Nose slice to the inside of the turn is the most dramatic cue for controlling
the level turn. The amount of nose slice and therefore the ease with which it
can be seen is a function of airspeed, altitude and environment. The faster
you go, the less nose slice you see for a given overbank. The time to impact
and the time required to stop it are the same, but a slow speed deviation is
easier to see than a high speed deviation. The closer to the ground the more
obvious the nose slice is. If there is very little background against which to
see the nose slice, it is harder to detect. The classic cases are over water,
haze, weather, or at night. As stated, the nose slice and HUD are the two
cues to monitor on a 1, 2, or 3 second basis and that implies looking
essentially right out the front of the aircraft (Figure D-22). When the pilot’s
cross-check is through the HUD to the canopy bow, he will protect the crew
from the low contrast, hard-to-see objects, and have their eyes in the best
spot to see the nose slice and monitor the velocity vector for precision. WSOs
should monitor this too, using the HUD repeater, particularly when the pilot
is checking six or is inside the cockpit. The crew can take 1-2 second glances
into the turn to anticipate rising terrain.

NOTE: 4G, 10° OVERBANK
(85° OF BANK)

AGD-01-22

Figure D - 22. Nose Slice Due to Overbank.

D - 29 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_36.jpeg:
The crew now knows:
@ What to look for—nose slice to the inside of the turn.
@ When to look for it—every 1, 2, or 3 seconds, depending on AGL.

@ Where to find it—out the front of the aircraft; between the velocity
vector and the canopy bow.

@ How to use it—reduce the bank angle or roll out to stop the nose
slice.

RIDGE CROSSINGS

Now that you have heard the basics of low altitude maneuvering, let us move
on to some tactical applications. Crossing ridge lines in high threat areas can
be a dangerous maneuver. The aircraft is highlighted to both ground and air
threats, so minimizing exposure is paramount. The type of crossing you
execute will depend on your comfort level and knowledge of the terrain.
Detailed route study is essential, especially when flying a mission over
terrain you are seeing for the first time. Ridge crossings should be avoided if
at all possible, but obviously, many situations will force you to cross a ridge.
Plan for and practice good ridge crossing techniques. The three types of ridge
crossings that are commonly employed are perpendicular, parallel, and
saddle.

AGD-1 D - 30


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_37.jpeg:
Perpendicular

This crossing minimizes enemy radar or visual acquisition but should be done
only when you know your 6 o’clock is clear (Figure D-23). Accelerate as
required to maintain tactical airspeed during the pull-up. Pull early enough
to avoid a large overshoot crossing the ridge, so you crest the ridge at your
specified minimum low level altitude. To go down the back side, bunt or roll
and pull, depending on the terrain. A totally inverted pull-down is
prohibited. The roll and pull technique is most effective when crossing large,
steep, isolated ridge lines. A bunt or pushover is more appropriate for milder,
rolling terrain. The advantages of the bunt are straight line navigation, no
wing flash, and less crew disorientation. Remember the zero-G transient and
10-second negative-G restrictions. To execute the roll and pull technique,
unload and roll to approximately 120° of bank, then slice down. At the
desired nose low position, roll out and resume level flight. Initial attempts at
this technique should be limited to a 15° nose low attitude. DO NOT bury the
nose in the new valley. This maneuver may put you belly up to unexpected
high terrain on the other side of the mountain. Consider wing flash during
the slice/pull-down; it is highly visible.

AGD-01-23

Figure D - 23. Perpendicular Ridge Crossing.

D-31 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_38.jpeg:
Parallel

This type of approach is appropriate if your 6 o’clock is or may be threatened
(Figure D-24). It denies the bandit a blue sky background and provides a
difficult guns environment. Instead of a straight approach to the ridge, turn
to arrive at the pull-up point with approximately 45° of crossing angle to the
ridge. Pull up later than for a perpendicular crossing, and continue to turn in
the climb to be parallel to the ridge crest just below the top. The maneuver
at the crest is flown similar to the pull-down during a pop-up attack. Roll
and pull into the ridge, crossing the crest at or slightly above your specified
minimum low level altitude. Continue a loaded roll to fly down the backside
of the ridge, on a heading 90-135° from the ridge line. Roll out and continue
the low level.

AGD-01-24

Figure D - 24. Parallel Ridge Crossing.

AGD-1 D - 32


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_39.jpeg:
Saddle

The saddle type ridge crossing is similar to the parallel and should be used if
the opportunity presents itself (Figure D-25). Turn parallel to the ridge line
below the crest until you can use a saddle, canyon, or the end of the ridge line
to cross to the other side. The exact maneuver is dictated by terrain
characteristics. It may be as simple as a level 90° turn or a check turn right
or left to fly through an approaching gap in the ridge. A climb may not be
necessary, allowing you to continue terrain masking or stay below threat
radar coverage.

ie

AGD-01-25

Figure D - 25. Saddle Ridge Crossing.

D - 33 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the hazards associated with the low altitude environment to
include the relationship between various low level maneuvers, their
percentage of exposure, and the resulting percentage of accidents.

2. Identify the terrain clearance and mission tasks, and their priority in
low altitude flight.

3. Identify the references and procedures used to control the aircraft in
low altitude flight.

4. Identify considerations when executing low altitude intercepts.

REFERENCES

AFTTP 3-3, Vol XVII Chapter 7 Low Altitude Operations

AGD-1 B-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_40.jpeg:
LOW ALTITUDE INTERCEPTS

There are some unique problems associated with executing an intercept
against a low altitude target, especially if he has his speed up. It may not be
overly difficult to achieve MRM parameters in this situation, but if a VID or
conversion for a SRM shot is required, the intercept is more difficult. The
problems with a low, fast flier are generally two-fold; first, getting around the
corner for a stern VID or SRM shot with enough speed to close, and second, to
make the corner at low altitude without running into the ground. Both of the
problems can be solved with the same technique. Use a “ramp” down or
slicing approach path with 40-50° offset (depending on aspect). Start your
conversion no later than a 14 aspect angle. Continue downhill at bandit
airspeed or faster on a pure pursuit curve and slide toward the target’s

6 o'clock. Make your descent gradual enough to avoid a square corner near
the ground and, at the same time, make your conversion turn gradual enough
to preserve your airspeed; thus, a large offset and early turn. Do not be ina
big hurry to give up an altitude advantage. Altitude can be used to reduce
turn radius, maintain a mach advantage, and provide potential energy for the
conversion turn. Prior to descending to target altitude, check your weapons
capabilities. Your best shot may not be “look up.”

The technique just described is used when attacking a bandit from a higher
altitude, or “high-to-low.” The high-to-low, low-to-low, and low-to-high
intercept options will be practiced during your training.

High-to-Low

Ground controlled intercept (GCI), AWACS, and the F-15E radar will enable
detection of low altitude threats. Beyond visual range (BVR) rules of
engagement (ROE) will simplify employment, but certain situations will
dictate a conversion into the low altitude regime to employ weapons. Target
terrain masking, camouflage, and lost radar locks due to gimbal limits, beam
clutter, or intervening terrain all complicate a kill at low altitude. Strict
radar discipline and visual search is required to clear the area around the
bandit and avoid being sandwiched. Get the majority of the conversion turn
completed early to enable concentration on the target and ground avoidance
during the last part of the conversion. Some common errors encountered
during the conversion follow.

AGD-1 D - 34


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_41.jpeg:
Intercepting a shadow instead of the target.

@ Failing to get a tally.

@ Target fixation.

@ Excessive airspeed going downhill, leading to an overshoot.
@ Late conversion turn, leading to a cold rollout.

@ Mistaking high speed for closure and pulling power too early,
resulting in a cold rollout.

@ Insufficient offset, leading to visual blanking of the target under
your nose while pulling lead to complete the intercept.

@ Attempting to stay nose-on or in-plane once the conversion is
started. Accept an offset rollout to avoid steep pitch attitudes and
insufficient ground clearance.

Low-to-Low

Many of the problems encountered in the high-to-low intercept remain in the
low-to-low situation. Intercept execution is similar to the high-to-low but
without the use of the vertical. Terrain masking by the bandit is much more
of a problem, and dead reckoning the bandit’s position may be required.
Because the terrain is a constant threat, normally the WSO runs the radar
and intercept. If the WSO needs to check 6 o’clock, the pilot may need to take
over the radar and intercept. In this case, a climb may be necessary for ease
of cross-check. Radar employment over flat terrain should be effective, but if
a ridge line is in the way, climbing may be the best option. Finally, the lower
you are, the more weapons employment becomes a problem due to line of
sight, collision course profile, and clutter.

D- 35 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_42.jpeg:
Low-to-High

Low-to-high conversions require evaluation of both vertical and horizontal
turning room The optimum maneuver is a chandelle to the bandit’s low

6 o'clock, never leaving his blind zone. If there is not enough vertical turning
room alone (minimum 5000 feet), gain more lateral and horizontal turning
room with offset geometry. Obtaining a tally is not generally difficult unless
there is a large altitude delta or low sun angle. If a large altitude delta
exists, climb earlier to preserve airspeed during rollout. Although terrain
avoidance is less of a problem in this scenario, avoid a square corner endgame
which results in a slow airspeed, nose high attitude at low altitude. In this
case, accept an overshoot in the bandit’s blind zone while preserving your
energy. Remember, after flying at very low altitudes, 2000 feet seems like
plenty of vertical turning room. Do not be fooled by this illusion.

Airspeed Control

Positional advantage requires recognition of airspeed, G-loading, and aspect
while restricted to single-plane maneuvering. The factor most affecting
single-plane maneuvering is airspeed. Increased airspeed is required to close
if the target separates, but once the target executes a defensive turn, the
attacker must reduce airspeed to prevent a flight path overshoot. Control
overshoots with lag, as use of the vertical increases the chance for detection
by enemy air and ground threats. The deeper in lag you go, the faster you
can fly and still maintain positional advantage. Fly to maintain tally and a
positional advantage while not highlighting your aircraft to other enemy
fighters.

Weapons Employment

Because low altitude shrinks aerodynamic envelopes and provides IR and
radio frequency (RF) clutter, valid weapons parameters are more difficult to
achieve. These restricted envelopes increase maneuvering and pursuit time
for the attacker, and often deny an immediate shot once a positional
advantage is achieved. Once a tally is acquired, it can be lost by bandit
terrain masking, sun angles, or shadows. An aware bandit may change
course once he realizes the attacker has lost tally, making dead reckoning of
the bandit’s new position very difficult.

AGD-1 D - 36


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_43.jpeg:
Killing a low altitude bandit with a missile requires the attacker to launch a
missile so it does not strike the ground and the missile seeker acquires the
target at or prior to launch. The AIM-7 must be launched to maintain radar
LOS through missile TOF. Ensure you have both visual and aural self-track
indications prior to an AIM-9 launch to preclude tracking a hot spot on the
ground.

All missiles attempt to fly a collision course to the target. If the missile is
launched with the target climbing, the missile climbs toward the predicted
impact point. If the missile is launched while the target is descending, the
missile dives toward the predicted impact point and may strike the ground
en route. When firing either IR or radar missiles, a slight nose up attitude
reduces ground impact potential. Flying low to ensure a look up blue sky
shot improves acquisition, but may also result in a missile 1000 feet at

12 o'clock in the dirt if launch altitude is insufficient for the missile to attain
flying airspeed. Refer to AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17 for specific techniques,
tactics, and radar employment considerations.

LOW ALTITUDE FLYING CONSIDERATIONS

There are inherent advantages and disadvantages in conducting tactical air
operations at high or low altitudes. When a crew decides that the situation
lends itself best to operations in the low altitude environment, they must
prioritize their workload and develop an internal clock that allows them to fly
effectively at a very low altitude. Task prioritization and cross-check rhythm
must be adjusted to fit the terrain, weather, and threat situation.
Cross-check frequency is usually thought of in terms of straight and level
flight or a stable 4-5 G level turn; those are not the only—and not the most
demanding—flight conditions facing fighter crew members.

Rules of Thumb

Very low altitude flying demands that each crew develop and maintain great
self-discipline and a cross-check rate that ensures aircraft control in all flight
regimes. Aircrews must not allow other tasks to divert their attention to the
point that collision with the ground is inevitable. The following rules of
thumb can be helpful.

D- 37 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_44.jpeg:
When flying wings level below 1000 feet AGL, cross-check aircraft
attitude and altitude every 3-5 seconds.

In turning flight below 1000 feet AGL, cross-check aircraft attitude
and altitude every 1-3 seconds.

The lower you fly, the less margin for error in control of aircraft
attitude and altitude. This margin is reduced dramatically when
turning at low altitude.

When attention must be diverted to other tasks (e.g., switch
changes, copying target information, checking six, etc.) bring the
aircraft to wings level and place it in a slight climb. If possible, give
the WSO some of these duties. Attention should not remain
channelized for more than 3-5 seconds in this case.

Crew Coordination

Smooth in-flight coordination between crew members requires mutual
knowledge of the operation and interaction of systems. Certain elements of
crew coordination have become standard and those which have not should be
discussed in detail by the crew during the mission briefing. As a general
guide the following crew duties apply.

AGD-1

The pilot’s primary responsibility is aircraft control and ground
avoidance. Terrain clearance is maintained by using visual
references and the radar altimeter. After clearing the terrain
ahead and to either side of the aircraft the pilot can then perform a
quick cockpit check. Since his primary responsibility is looking
outside, the pilot should be less concerned with referencing maps or
other non-HUD data.

The WSO should check six and clear using the briefed visual
search and air-to-air radar. Terrain clearance tasks and mission
tasks should be divided, yet shared. The WSO’s primary
responsibility is mission tasks. The pilot should always tell the
WSO when his attention will be diverted. The WSO can then
concentrate on monitoring the aircraft’s attitude.


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_45.jpeg:
Approaching the turn point, the WSO should inform the pilot of the
MSA, the direction of turn and the course and time (or distance) for
the next leg, when asked. If not asked, the WSO should ensure that
the pilot establishes the desired heading. Further, the WSO should
back up the pilot by keeping track of time, monitoring the airspeed
and any other dead reckoning matters.

If the pilot cannot HOTAS it then he should consider having the
WSO do it.

Cues to Overtasking

Self-observation skills are easy to learn and are required for successful low
altitude flying—the crew must learn to evaluate themselves. The following
is a list of general objective cues to overtasking in addition to the specific
maneuver criteria established in the flying phase.

Poor performance of any basic maneuver

Wasted movements in the cockpit

Missed tasks in a familiar sequence

Missed first attempt at familiar switches

Erratic or indecisive aircraft control (pilot only)

Lack of conscious awareness of managing your task loading
A feeling of operating “behind the aircraft”

Loss of verbal responses, missed or late radio calls

Loss of aural responses, no response to radio calls or voice warnings

D - 39 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_46.jpeg:
The most important point is to key on each of these cues as the mission
progresses. The cumulative sum of these cues compared to some standard for
a similar set of tasks forms a good measure of overtasking. At times any one
of the cues is enough to “knock it off.” At other times, they just mean a
decrease in performance and not an impending problem. Repeated errors or
consistent poor performance means overtasking that is not being corrected.
When this occurs, climb.

AGD-1 D - 40


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_47.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

What is the best descent rate, in degrees, in terms of balancing rapid
descents with ease of cross-check?

a. 65°

b. 10°

ce. 15°

d. 20°

To descend 400 feet, a FPA works best.
a. 2.5°

b. 3.0°

c. 4.0°

d. 5.0°

If your altitude is 1000 feet, what should your dive angle be to
reposition on a target from a pop-up?

ao op

5°
10°
15°
20°

When in a dive everything expands or flows outward from the impact
point/velocity vector.

a.
b.

True
False

D-41 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_48.jpeg:
5. The bunt or pushover maneuver is most appropriately used when
crossing steep, isolated ridge lines.

a. True
b. False
6. An intercept to stern conversion in the low altitude environment

should be flown more conservatively than high altitude intercepts to
minimize ground impact potential.

a True
b. False

AGD-1 D - 42


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_49.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 43 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read AFTTP 38-3, Vol XVII, Chapter 7, Low Altitude Operations.

C-1 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_50.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-1 D - 44


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_51.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

Terrain clearance tasks have a higher priority than mission tasks.
a. True

b. False

Using the 10° rule, what is your dive angle when doing a 30°,
5 second delayed, vertical jink?

a. 15°
b. 20°
c. 25°

What is the key to controlling a level turn?

Nose slice to the inside of the turn
Nose slice to the outside of the turn
Bank steering bar

LAWS

no op

Which of the following is not a consideration when executing low
altitude intercepts?

Radar break locks

Ground avoidance

Ensuring ground speed is displayed in the HUD
Potential missile-ground impact

Ro op

E-1 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_52.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-1 E-2


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_53.jpeg:
AGL
AIM
AWACS
BVR

Cc

CTA
ECM
FAC
FPA
GCI
HOTAS
HUD
IR

LOS

MCT
MRM
MSA
MSL
NCT

RF

GLOSSARY
Above ground level
Air intercept missile
Air warning and control system
Beyond visual range
Command, control, and communication
Critical tasking altitude
Electronic countermeasures
Forward air controller
Flight path angle
Ground controlled intercept
Hands on throttle and stick
Head-up display
Infrared
Line of sight
Minimum altitude
Mission critical tasks
Medium range missile
Minimum safe altitude
Mean sea level
Noncritical tasks

Radio frequency

AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_54.jpeg:
ROE Rules of engagement

SA Situational awareness

SRM Short range missile

TAS True airspeed

TCT Terrain clearance tasks

TEWS Tactical electronic warfare system
TOF Time of flight

TTI Time to impact

VFR Visual flight rules

VID Visual identification

WSO Weapon system officer

AGD-1 F-2


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_55.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

F-3 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_56.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-1 C-2


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

This text primarily deals with concerns of the low altitude environment. It
does not, however, address why low altitude flying is necessary.

RISK ASSESSMENT

To make sense of this approach, first analyze the risks at low altitude. The
low altitude environment has contributed to a large percentage of accidents.
Day VFR low altitude flying exposure is approximately 10% of the total flying
hours, yet 57% of aircrew fatalities occur in the low altitude environment. To
increase the crew’s low altitude awareness, this text defines the crew’s
responsibilities and focuses on specific hazards.

As shown in Figure D-1, maneuvering in the vertical and turning at low
altitude accounted for the largest percentage of accidents. Vertical
maneuvering claimed 34% of the aircrews in only 3% of the exposure.
Turning the aircraft while looking somewhere other than out front
contributed to a majority of the low altitude accidents, 52%, with 5% of the
exposure. The important thing to understand here is that maneuvering flight
historically has proven most dangerous. Why that happens and how to avoid
it is the focus of this discussion. To better understand low altitude dynamics,
first break down the crew’s tasking.

MANEUVER EXPOSURE ACCIDENTS

AGD-01-01

Figure D - 1. Maneuvers, Exposure, and Accidents.

D-1 AGD-1


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_8.jpeg:
LOW ALTITUDE TASK MANAGEMENT

The best way to view the aircrew’s primary job is as a time-shared process in
which they first ensure terrain clearance, and second, take care of the
mission. All tasks may be classified as either terrain clearance tasks or
mission tasks.

Terrain Clearance Tasks

To properly manage terrain clearance, the aircrew must control four specific
tasks (Figure D-2). These prioritized tasks are aircraft control, vector
control, AGL control, and time control (pacing).

Aircraft control is the process of maintaining the aircraft within its flight
envelope of angle of attack, airspeed, and G. Aircraft control is the first
terrain clearance task requirement; without it, controlling vector, AGL, or
time is impossible. Flying the aircraft has the highest priority and is the
pilot’s primary concern.

The second task, vector control, is the process of assessing and modifying the
aircraft vector in elevation and azimuth relative to the terrain.

Third, AGL control is the process of assessing and modifying the aircraft AGL
in relation to the terrain. Vector and AGL are the two physical variables
which define the true boundaries of safe, low altitude maneuvering.

However, to accomplish the mission, the aircrew cannot spend all their efforts
on controlling vector and AGL.

Fourth, time control (i.e., pacing) is the process of mentally controlling the
frequency and duration of terrain clearance and mission cross-check time. It
is the key to proper task management. To accomplish the mission, the crew
must leave the vector and AGL alone for short periods of time. The more
they can leave the vector and AGL alone, the more time they have for mission
tasks. Time control is the hardest to learn, train, and control; yet it carries
the greatest potential for causing ground impact.

AGD-1 D-2


Text from AGD-1_Low_Altitude_Awareness_Training_page_9.jpeg:
LEAST IMPORTANT/
TIME CONTROL HARDEST TO LEARN
AGL CONTROL

VECTOR CONTROL
AIRCRAFT CONTROL
MOST IMPORTANT

AGD-01-02

Figure D - 2. Terrain Clearance Tasks.

D-3 AGD-1


