Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-2
INTERCEPTS

FEBRUARY 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_10.jpeg:
Aspect Angle (AA)

AA is the angle from the tail of the target to the line of sight from the
target to the fighter (Figure D-3). Aspect angle is independent of fighter
heading but dependent on the target heading. The maximum possible AA
is 180° (presented as H for Head) and the minimum is 0° (presented as T
for Tail). When displayed on the air-to-air radar display, the AA is
associated with an L or R indicating which side of the target is visible to
the fighter. Aspect angle determines the intercept approach quadrant.
Aspect angle and range are the primary indications used in determining
the intercept geometry. Note that the fighter’s heading is not a factor
when computing aspect angle.

005°

ASPECT ] <+——Y—Y FTR HEADING

ANGLE

TARGET
HEADING

140°

C
=
CO
o

(= ee ee
e7 EIRIPIEP

AAM-02-03

Figure D - 3. Aspect Angle.

AAM-2 D-4


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_11.jpeg:
Antenna Train Angle (ATA)

ATA is the angle formed from the nose of your aircraft to the radar line of
sight to the target (Figure D-4). Essentially, it is where your radar is
looking to see the target. Due to radar search limitations, ATA is limited
to 60° left or right of the nose in search and 73° in STT. Independent of
target heading, ATA is dependent on the fighter heading. ATA in

Figure D-4 is 15° left.

<———FTR HEADING
TARGET
a HEADING

140°

AAM-02-04

Figure D - 4. Antenna Train Angle.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_12.jpeg:
Collision Antenna Train Angle (CATA)

CATA is the antenna train angle the fighter must maintain to be on a
collision course with the target (Figure D-5). Maintaining the target on
the CATA maintains a constant line of sight to the target.

© TOWOIOWOTO!

Eo

500 15R 140

Q
=

1

F
ot

Teen

Figure D - 5. Collision Antenna Train Angle.

AAM-02-05

Changes in the target heading or airspeed, or the fighter airspeed affect
the CATA. Fighter heading does not affect the CATA but is dependent on
the CATA if a collision course intercept is to be flown. A target on the
CATA maintains a constant azimuth and aspect angle. It does not drift
left or right. The CATA provides the quickest time to intercept the target
and the maximum conservation of overtake. The CATA may be
determined for co-speed targets by using the formula, CATA = 180° - AA.
To fly the CATA, the target is then offset that number of degrees from the
center of the air-to-air radar display toward the side of the display
opposite the target’s AA (left or right). Example: A target with a 15R AA
would have a CATA of 30° left.

Outside of 1.2 aero, fly the CATA by keeping the MRM steering dot
centered in the ASE circle. Inside 1.2 aero, centering the steering dot
provides missile-to-target collision steering, not aircraft-to-aircraft
collision steering.

AAM-2 D-6


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_13.jpeg:
HOT/COLD

The terms HOT and COLD (Figure D-6) refer to those areas of the radar
display that either tend to increase (HOT) or decrease (COLD) aspect
angle. The CATA is the dividing line between the HOT and COLD sides.
If the target is maintained on the HOT side, turning room decreases,
aspect angle increases and eventually the fighter would fly in front of the
target. If the target is maintained on the COLD side, turning room
increases, aspect angle decreases, and the fighter will eventually fly
behind the target.

ap

O
O

[ee es
Fm elles

CATA
HOT SIDE COLD SIDE

AAM-02-06

Figure D - 6. HOT and COLD.

The hot side of the display is defined as the side (left or right) which has
the CATA on it. The cold side would be the opposite side. The cold side of
the display is easily determined by using the aspect angle letter; i.e., 15L
indicates the cold side of the display to be the left side, while 15R means
the right side is the cold side. The hot side is the side opposite the aspect
letter.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_14.jpeg:
Target Drift

When a target is not on the CATA, the line of sight (antenna train angle)
changes constantly. That change in scope azimuth is called drift. Correct
interpretation of target drift on the radar display is necessary to maintain
control of the intercept and make proper decisions during the intercept.

Nonmaneuvering target drift can be summarized in four “rules”
(Figure D-7).

Rule 1: A target on the CATA tracks straight down the radar display
and maintains a constant AA (target B).

Rule 2: Targets not on the CATA drift away from their CATA (targets A,
C, D, E).

Rule 3: A target’s track is steepest (less drift) near its CATA
(target A) (less drift).

Rule 4: A target on the nose drifts cold (target D) (except for an H aspect
which is on the CATA).

|

ay
HH sede ds Ee te
|
i
f
i

!

FIGHTER AAM-02-07

Figure D - 7.

AAM-2 D-8


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_15.jpeg:
Note that the fighter will cross in front of target A on the hot side of the
scope. In this case, aspect angle will initially increase, until it reaches its
maximum value. On the other hand, note that target C will drift cold
even though it is initially on the left side of the scope. The fighter will
pass behind the target.

Pursuit Types

At some point during an intercept it may be necessary to select a course to
the target’s stern. Examples include avoiding a threat’s all-aspect weapon
capability, tanker rejoin, rejoining on a target to provide assistance or
visually identify its type or origin, and achieving weapon employment
zones for stern aspect ordnance. Three types of pursuit courses may be
flown during the intercept stern conversion: pure pursuit, lead pursuit,
and lag pursuit.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_16.jpeg:
Pure Pursuit

Pure pursuit (Figure D-8) is the primary means for converting to the
bandit’s 6 o’clock during the intercept. Essentially, pure pursuit occurs
with the fighter’s nose on the target. The radar depiction has the target
at zero azimuth and the SRM steering dot centered in the ASE circle. On
the HUD, the TD box is centered on the waterline.

ieee

AAM-02-08

Figure D - 8. Pure Pursuit.

AAM-2 D-10


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_17.jpeg:
Lead Pursuit

Lead pursuit (Figure D-9) is the situation where the fighter is attempting
to gain closure or increase aspect angle by predicting a future position of
the target aircraft and flying to that position (cut-off). Basically, the
fighter points his nose in front/ahead of the target aircraft. On the radar
display, the target is placed on the hot side. On the HUD, the TD box is
below the waterline (maybe at the bottom of the HUD). In flying a lead
pursuit curve, the fighter continuously changes heading toward the
target’s heading to maintain the target HOT of the nose. A turning rejoin
is flown using lead pursuit.

Figure D - 9. Lead Pursuit.

D-11 AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_18.jpeg:
Lag Pursuit

Lag pursuit (Figure D-10) occurs when the fighter attempts to reduce
closure or decrease aspect angle. Essentially, the fighter points his nose
behind the target aircraft. On the radar, the target is placed on the COLD
side and on the HUD, the TD box is above the waterline. If lag pursuit is
employed too late or it is too extreme, a square corner is generated
causing a flight path overshoot.

AAM-02-10

Figure D - 10. Lag Pursuit.

AAM-2 D-12


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_19.jpeg:
Closure

Closure (Vc) is the angular velocity between two aircraft. It is displayed
on the right side of the radar display in knots. As aspect changes, so does
the displayed closure (aspect decreases, closure decreases; aspect
increases, closure increases). Since the intercept geometry is based on a
co-speed target, the target/fighter speed ratio is also important. If the
ratio favors the target, the intercept needs to be hotter (Figure D-11). If
the ratio favors the fighter, the intercept may be colder.

F
:
Oo
Oo

l

iaigiele

Figure D - 11.

AAM-02-11


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the

F-15E, its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but
is to be used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications
and technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-2, September, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_20.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

fe)
iS,
au

O
O
C
o

AAM-02-12

Figure D - 12.

Using Figure D-12, find the following if your heading is 135°.

AA CATA
Target Heading Target Airspeed
Fighter TAS Ve

If you want to gain closure on a target, you must fly a
curve.

To fly the quickest time to kill, you must fly

CATA to offset the pure pursuit curve.

lead pursuit to 10 nm, then pure pursuit to the kill.
CATA all the way to the kill.

offset until the target is 50° right then follow lead pursuit
steering to the kill.

poop


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_21.jpeg:
A target on the nose with a 17L aspect angle will drift

a. left.

b. right.

What are the two characteristics of a target on its CATA?

What is the drift pattern for targets not on the CATA?

Except for a target with an H aspect (because it is on its CATA), how
does a target on the nose drift?


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_22.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. AA=16L

CATA = 20° right

Target Heading = 010°

Target Airspeed = 520 knots

Fighter TAS = 465 knots

Ve = 870 knots
2. Lead pursuit
3. 4¢
4, a

5. Straight down the radar display (constant ATA), maintains a
constant AA

6. Drift away from CATA

7. Always drifts cold

AAM-2 D-16


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_23.jpeg:
MEDIUM ALTITUDE INTERCEPTS
Intercept Types

There are two basic types of intercepts and a variation which combines
the elements of both (Figure D-13). First is the cut-off or collision course
intercept. This is generally used where minimum time to kill is desired.
The other is the stern conversion, which is used when other limitations
preclude a cut-off. Identification of the target may require a stern
conversion to be performed. The two together form the front MRM attack
with a stern reattack. This allows for a stern conversion should an MRM
attack fail or if there is a requirement to engage more than one bandit.

TARGET

STERN CONVERSION

MRM ATTACK
WITH STERN CONVERSION
AAM-02-13

Figure D - 13.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_24.jpeg:
NOTE
For ease of interpretation, the following intercept discussions assume the

fighter has acquired a single contact on a co-speed, nonmaneuvering
bandit who is unaware of the fighter’s presence.

Approach Quadrants

In the intercept, there are four approach quadrants (Figure D-14) which
influence how we accomplish the intercept. Each quadrant is defined by
the displayed aspect angle. A head-on approach is in the 16 - H aspect.
The front quarter is in the 12 - 15 aspect. The beam approach is in the 7 -
11 aspect. The stern is in the T - 6 aspect.

HEAD-ON

FRONT
QUARTER

7-11

AAN-02-14

Figure D - 14. Approach Quadrants.

AAM-2 D-18


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_25.jpeg:
Cut-off/Collision Course Intercept

The cut-off or collision course intercept is the quickest course to weapons
employment and is also the easier of the two intercept types to fly. Once
you have found the target and have determined that a collision course
intercept is the type to be flown, you must determine the CATA. The
formula for a co-speed CATA is:

180° - AA = CATA

Once you have determined the CATA, turn to place the target on the
CATA. While on the CATA, aspect angle remains constant and the target
tracks at a constant azimuth. Outside of 1.2 aero, turning to center the
MRM steering dot in the ASE circle places the target on the CATA. At 1.2
aero, the steering dot transitions from aircraft-to-aircraft collision steering
to missile-to-target collision steering. Keeping the dot centered will result
in a turn into the target. At 10 seconds to go, the dot provides pure
pursuit.

As you can see, the collision course intercept is easy to fly and puts you in
the earliest position to employ ordnance. However, not all situations
allow the collision course intercept.

Stern Conversions

Should tactics or restrictions preclude the collision course intercept, a
stern conversion should be flown. The objective of a stern conversion is to
develop and maintain turning room and close to an ID and/or firing
position. There are three types of stern conversions flown: horizontal,
combination, and vertical. Each will be discussed in relation to the
approach quadrant.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_26.jpeg:
Horizontal

The horizontal intercept is flown nearly level with the target and offers
some advantages. The turning room problem is simplified because the
turning room shown on the display is the turning room you have. Also,
since the intercept is basically two-dimensional, it is easier to track a
target with no lockon and easier to fly during night or IMC conditions.
However, there are some disadvantages. The fighter is easier to see and
defeat because he is level with the target. Also, the horizontal intercept
requires a lot of turning room (8-10 nm). The general parameters for a
horizontal intercept are sufficient turning room until pure pursuit is
established, 100-200 knots speed advantage until rollout, 50-100 knots Vc
at rollout with less than 9000 feet range.

Head-on Horizontal Intercept

The head-on horizontal intercept (Figure D-15) starts with aspect angles
from 16 - H. Since the fighter is on the target’s nose, more maneuvering
will be required to gain sufficient turning room. The procedures used to
accomplish the intercept are to offset the target 40-50° cold of the CATA
and counterturn to maintain the target at that azimuth, until establishing
the pure pursuit curve with a 15 AA at 20 nm, or 14 AA at 15 nm, or 13
AA at 10 nm. The later the target is acquired, the more aggressively the
aircraft must be maneuvered to gain the required turning room.

AAM-2 D - 20


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_27.jpeg:
— :
Sigia

9s (OO

AAM-02-15

Figure D - 15. Head-on Horizontal Intercept.

HORIZONTAL PURSUIT CURVE
AA RANGE
13 30 nm
13 20 nm
13 15 nm
13 10-12 nm


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_28.jpeg:
Front Quarter Horizontal Intercept

The front quarter horizontal intercept (Figure D-16) is flown from aspect
angles between 12 - 15. The good news is that turning room already
exists. However, the fighter must maneuver to keep the turning room
from becoming excessive.

AAM-02-16

Figure D - 16. Front Quarter Horizontal Intercept.

The procedures to follow are to place the target on the CATA until
intersecting the pure pursuit curve and then go pure pursuit; (i.e., lockon
shows a 14R AA at 35 nm - put target on CATA [40°L], go pure pursuit
when range decreases to 15 nm). Remember, once you put the target on
the CATA, it will be necessary to turn toward the target to go pure. Then
the turn direction will have to be reversed to maintain the target pure (on
the nose) until dead astern.

AAM-2 D - 22


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_29.jpeg:
Beam Horizontal Intercept

The beam horizontal intercept (Figure D-17) already has you in a position
requiring more of a chase down rather than the geometry doing the work.
The aspect angles are from 7 - 11. The CATA is off the display and
unusable without GCI. Therefore, airspeed coupled with some geometric
cut-off will be used to close on the bandit. The procedures to follow are to
accelerate to 200 knots speed advantage, displace the target 50-55° on the
hot side of the display, counterturn to maintain the target at that
azimuth, then go pure pursuit on intercepting the pure pursuit guide
(between 5-10 nm).

OIONONOTO

Biaiiel

Figure D - 17. Beam Horizontal Intercept.

AAM-02-17

Stern Horizontal Intercept

The stern horizontal intercept is flown from aspect angles between

T -6. The procedures are essentially the same as for the beam horizontal
intercept; however, displacement should be less. Displace the target 72 AA
on the hot side of the radar display and accelerate. Establish pure pursuit
between 3-5 nm. Once again, airspeed is going to be your primary means
of closure.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

C
a O
\f_ err ta H

==

COVER

INTERCEPTS
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with F-15E intercept
procedures/techniques. It also covers some aspects of crew coordination
and how they relate to the mission. It provides you with the knowledge
needed to more efficiently perform the intercept mission.

CONTENTS:

Ie EDO USGI exe ce ase ees ese sesame ses se aoe: ces seam Ses ee an cee: ator se ese ao so A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)..........0.eeeeseeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TERT wr sees sas ces cas wa one sane ws wats we sus eas ates as ee ant eas eS amt ae Ua nt OS aa ale Ma 8 D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ... eecccessneecesneeeessaeecssaeeceesaeesesaeessseeeeeaees E-1
CS OIBIS AY cess ans sane anus aesn ssn news canis ave aise Sue MOR mS EMG NSS Mate MG GS ENG Mens ER A F-1


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_30.jpeg:
Conversion Pursuit Guide

The conversion pursuit guide (Figure D-18) was developed as an aid in
determining the turning room available. If the fighter has a 16 aspect at
30 nm, sufficient turning room exists to allow the fighter to immediately
pure pursuit the target. Turning room exists at the points shown in
Figure D-18.

30 NM

25 NM

10NM 15NM 20NM

5 NM

10 NM
15NM
20 NM 16 AA AT 30 NM
13 45 AAAT 20 NM
14 AA AT 15 NM
13 AA AT 10-12 NM
25 NM
30 NM

AAM-02-18
Figure D - 18. Conversion Pursuit Guide.

For the horizontal stern conversion it is easy to see the turning room lies
along a line offset from the target’s projected flight path by 10 nm.

AAM-2 D - 24


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_31.jpeg:
Pure Pursuit Conversion Turn

The pure pursuit conversion turn is based on ranges, aspects, and Vc used
to roll out at the target’s six, inside of 9000 feet, with positive Vc. The
table below lists the reference points. If your aspect/Vc is higher, allow
the target to drift slightly to lag (cold) and maintain until achieving a
reference point. If your aspect/Vc is lower, fly a lead pursuit curve until
reaching a reference point, then pure pursuit. Use these numbers to
check your progress during the final turn to the target’s stern and to
recognize the need to adjust to desired parameters.

CONVERSION TURN
RANGE ASPECT Ve
7nm 12 800-900
6 nm 10 700-800
5 nm 9 600-700
4nm 7 500-600
3nm 5 400-500
2nm 2 200-300
lnm T 100
Combination

Combination intercepts gain turning room in both the horizontal and
vertical. We can think of the intercept as either the chandelle or the slice.
The combination intercept has some distinct advantages. Unlike the
horizontal intercept, the combination gets the fighter away from the
target’s horizon and is therefore harder to see and to counter. The main
disadvantage is that night or IMC combination intercepts may not be
practical due to the maneuvering required. Normally, 5000-10,000 feet of
vertical (either high or low) turning room will be used. Since vertical
turning room is available, less horizontal offset is needed. As in the
horizontal intercept, there will be some Vc advantage carried throughout
the intercept, and the desired rollout is inside 9000 feet with positive Vc.
The pursuit guide below is adjusted to allow for the vertical turning room.

COMBINATION PURSUIT GUIDE

AA RANGE
17 40
16 20
15 15
14 10


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_32.jpeg:
Head-on Combination Intercept

The head-on combination intercept (Figure D-19) is similar to the head-on
horizontal. The target is displaced while establishing 5000-10,000 feet
vertical separation, 30-50° cold of the CATA (depending on the amount of
vertical offset used); counterturn to maintain offset and establish pure
pursuit at the appropriate aspect angle and range.

16 AA
15 AA
14 AA

Tele

Figure D - 19. Head-on Combination Intercept.

AAM-02-19

AAM-2 D - 26


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_33.jpeg:
Front Quarter Combination Intercept

The procedures for the front quarter combination intercept are similar to
the front quarter horizontal as shown in Figure D-20.

® ) © ©
Ne hee ke he

“= at ©
)

#
= « ®
= i
Cr deo

IG
4
©

|
MN

ol

ieiei

Figure D - 20. Front Quarter Combination Intercept.

AAM-02-20


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_34.jpeg:
Beam / Stern Combination Intercept

The beam and stern combination intercepts are also similar to their
horizontal equivalents. As in the beam horizontal, airspeed advantage is
very important. The procedures are shown in Figure D-21.

@ wl. __—¥

j=

an

Ko
5-10 NM
5000-10,000 FT XY
4
Cw

AAN-02-21

Figure D - 21. Beam Combination Intercept.

AAM-2 D - 28


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_35.jpeg:
Vertical

The third means of gaining turning room is to use vertical only. There are
two types of vertical intercepts: low to high and high to low. A key
advantage to the vertical intercept is that it is very hard to be seen by the
target. Additionally, attacking from high allows entering the fight with
maximum energy advantage, while attacking from below may mask your
aircraft from the target’s radar. The disadvantages are difficulty in
getting a tally looking high to low, potential square corner (high to low),
energy depletion on a low to high (negative Vc), and difficulty in flying no
lockon. Desired parameters are more than 10,000 feet vertical offset,
early tally (8-10 nm), pure pursuit conversion at 30° antenna elevation/
depression, and a rollout within 9000 feet with 50-100 knots Vc. Only two
approaches are discussed, as both the beam and stern tend to be the same
as the combination intercept.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_36.jpeg:
Head-on Vertical Intercept

During the head-on vertical intercept (Figure D-22), increase aspect to as
close to a pure 180 as possible and achieve your desired vertical offset. At
a minimum, fly the CATA until you reach 30° antenna elevation/
depression, then pure pursuit. On a high to low, power is modulated to
control energy at rollout. On a low to high, throttles are in afterburner to
maintain energy. The front quarter vertical intercept is essentially the
same as the head-on.

30° ANTENNA
ELEVATION

Eeeeee

er

Figure D - 22. Head-on Vertical Intercept.

AAM-02-22

AAM-2 D - 30


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_37.jpeg:
Medium Altitude Intercept Summary

There are two basic types of intercepts flown: cut-off (collision course)
intercept and stern conversion. The collision course intercept is the easier
of the two, but it also makes up a portion of each stern conversion.

Table D-1 summarizes the three types of stern conversions flown. The
numbers shown are not the only possible combinations. As your
experience grows, so will your understanding of their relationship.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_38.jpeg:
ASPECT INTERCEPT ALTITUDE PURE
ANGLE GEOMETRY DIFFERENTIAL PURSUIT

HORIZONTAL

Put target cold to Deconflict +2000 feet 20nm & 15 AA
build turning room 15nm & 14AA
40-50° 10-12 nm & 13 AA

CATA to maintain Deconflict +2000 feet 20nm & 15 AA
turning room or hot to 15nm & 14AA
increase AA 10-12 nm & 13-12 AA

Put target 50-55° hot Deconflict +2000 feet 5-10 nm

to gain closure

V2 AA hot

Deconflict

COMBINATION

16-H Put target on CATA or  5000-10,000 feet 20nm & 16 AA
cold to build turning 15nm & 15 AA
room 30-50° 10nm & 14 AA

12-15 CATA to maintain 5000-10,000 feet 15nm & 15 AA
turning room or hot to 10-12 nm & 14 AA
increase AA

7-11 Put target 50-55° hot 5000-10,000 feet 5-10 nm
to gain closure

T-6 V2 AA, hot side 5000-10,000 feet 5nm

VERTICAL
10,000-15,000 feet 30° antenna el

CATA/increase AA to
H

CATA to conversion 10,000-15,000 feet 30° antenna el

point

Put target 50-55° hot
to gain closure

10,000-15,000 feet 5-10 nm & 30°
antenna el

Table D - 1. Intercept Summary.

AAM-2 D - 32


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_39.jpeg:
INTERCEPT STEPS, FLOW, AND ADJUSTMENTS

As in any task, the intercept can be subdivided into a series of steps which
result in the desired outcome. We call these steps the intercept flow (see
below).

The first step is to find the target. This is accomplished by using a
disciplined radar setup and search plan. Once the target is found, sample,
make a bearing, range, and altitude (BRA) call, and develop a
three-dimensional view of the intercept as depicted on the display.

Once accomplished, you can determine the intercept geometry and decide
on the type of intercept to be flown. Finally, maneuver for turning room
or to establish a collision course. This step needs to be accomplished at
longer ranges to minimize the degree of maneuvering required and to
deny the target an early tally. Remember, the Eagle is a large airframe.
Any maneuvering flashes the large wing and makes it easier for the
bandit to gain a tally. One of the more important steps is to get an early
tally on the bandit. Maneuvering against a target is much easier when
you perform it visually rather than with the radar. The last step of the
intercept flow is the endgame—why you did this in the first place. The
endgame consists of a medium range missile shot and/or conversion to the
stern for an identification pass or short range engagement.

Taking all this into consideration, the next concern is the flow or pacing of
an intercept. The intercept flows as follows.

e Radar setup/search

e Find target/lock on

e §6BRAcall

e Develop three-dimensional view
e Determine intercept geometry

e Maneuver for turning room, collision course, altitude offset, and
airspeed

e Endgame


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Given an air-to-air radar display with lock on, determine the
intercept geometry, target data, and action necessary to complete an
intercept.

2. Identify the primary and backup responsibilities for each crew
member during aerial attack maneuvers.

REFERENCES
AFTTP 3-3 VOL XVII Chapter 4-11, Intercepts
TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I A/A Radar Display

AIM-7 Employment
AIM-9 Employment
AIM-120 Employment

AAM-2 B-1


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_40.jpeg:
Radar Setup/Search

We previously discussed the factors that might affect the intercept. We
will now discuss radar setup and search together since they complement
each other. The intent of this course is not to provide a book answer on
radar search techniques. There are no absolutes. The radar search plan
depends on the mission scenario, radar capability, radar modes available
for use, personal preference, etc. Some general considerations and
techniques follow.

Range

Range selected on the scope should cover the expected threat range. This
can be determined by intelligence, GCI, or area of responsibility. Threat
parameters must be considered (i.e., size, altitude, speed, etc.). A GCI call
near the selected radar display range may dictate a greater range be
selected to see a possible lead/trail formation.

Elevation Scan

The el bar scans selected most frequently are 4 or 6 bar. The time
required for an entire frame (one complete set of 4 or 6 bar) increases with
the number of bars. El bar scans may be briefed by the flight lead. Keep
in mind, if more bars are selected than required to cover the altitude
band, elevation sweeps are wasted above/below target altitude and frame
time is increased.

Azimuth (AZ)

Select an AZ scan as appropriate to cover the required airspace. Realize
that at 60 nm range, 60° of azimuth sweep equates to 60 nm of airspace
(across the display) being covered; 120° azimuth sweep results in 120 nm
coverage. Know the airspace width or area of responsibility and select the
appropriate azimuth scan. Excessive coverage in azimuth means an
unnecessary increase in the time to search a segment of airspace. On the
other hand, understand that at 15 nm, 60° sweep is only 15 nm across and
may not be enough to cover the threat airspace.

AAM-2 D - 34


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_41.jpeg:
Acquisition Symbols

Initially, set the acquisition symbols at the briefed range and cover the
altitude briefed by the flight lead. You are responsible for this coverage
even as you search for targets. As you look for targets without GCI, set
the acquisition symbols short of where you expect to pick up targets. For
example, expect to see a fighter size target at 40-60 nm, so set acquisition
symbols at 20-30 nm. With GCI, use them to lead GCI range (due to their
radar and comm lag); 3-5 nm should be sufficient. Move the acquisition
symbols as target range decreases.

Altitude Coverage

Set up your radar plan to search the expected threat altitudes; e.g., low for
strike aircraft or high for reconnaissance aircraft. Radar altitude coverage
displayed in search is a function of acquisition symbol placement and bar
scan. To ensure a systematic search pattern, the acquisition symbol
placement should reflect target range. Within the preplanned search
responsibility, search the extreme altitudes first. (If responsible for low
altitude coverage, search surface and up first.)

Indeed, this discussion is fairly generic. The most important aspect of
radar search is having a plan. The search plan should ensure that the
area of responsibility is covered in a systematic manner.

Find Target/Lock On

Be patient in locking on the target. Allow for two hits on the target
during search before attempting to lock on. Frequently, false targets
(known as “birds”) may show up on the radar. With the frame store up

(1 or 2), true targets leave a history. The false targets do not normally
show a history. There are two common techniques for lock on. The first is
to move the acquisition symbol slightly closer in range than the target and
push the TDC/full action to command mini-raster for lock on (i.e., lead the
target). The target will fly into the acquisition pattern. Another
technique is to move the acquisition symbol until it is over the target, then
command lock on. Either technique works; however, while gaining
experience in the aircraft, the first technique is more successful. Avoid
trying to lock on during a turn as this can be difficult, and there is a high
degree of uncertainty as to which target was locked during multiple target
intercepts.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_42.jpeg:
BRA(A) Call

The BRA(A) report is used between GCI/AWACS and the fighter or
between the fighter and his wingman/leader. It is an abbreviated,
standardized format used to report target position. The BRA(A) report
can be relative to your aircraft or to a known geographical point (bullseye).

B is for bearing to the target (magnetic or relative).
R is for range to the target in nautical miles.

A is for target altitude.

(A) is for aspect angle.

The preferred BRA(A) uses magnetic bearing due to the inherent
positional errors associated with relative bearing. An example of a
BRA(A) report using Figure D-23 is “Jester 21, group (contact), one five
zero, twenty, twenty-one thousand, flanking north.” This differs slightly
from a BRA call made with search radar: “Jester 21, hit, one five zero,
twenty, medium.”

=
=
jz
5

AAM-02-23

Figure D - 23. BRA(A) Report.

AAM-2 D - 36


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_43.jpeg:
Develop Three-Dimensional View

Essential to understanding the geometry of any intercept is an awareness
of what the numbers on the radar display are telling you. As will be
stated many times in this course, there are but two radar intercept
objectives. Either establish a collision course and a close to front aspect
weapon parameters or build turning room (displacement from target
track) to convert to the stern. Using the target’s TAS and aspect angle,
establishing CATA should be easy. If the goal is to convert to the stern,
then the target aspect, altitude, and range indicate if sufficient turning
room exists or if more must be acquired. To build the “big picture,” the
radar presentation must be interpreted to what would be seen from a
“God’s Eye” view (Figure D-24). It is not necessary to draw out the radar
presentation on each intercept, but it is necessary to envision what is
happening. Hint: The TSD provides a very good “God’s Eye” view.

FIGHTER LINE OF SIGHT

TARGET

20

450 15L 180

AZIMUTH

FIGHTER
AAM-02-24

Figure D - 24. Three-Dimensional View.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_44.jpeg:
Determine Intercept Geometry

Once you have developed a “God’s Eye” view and know the type of
intercept you want, do what is required. Continue to think about the
factors that affect the intercept (sun, clouds, elevation, threat, rules of
engagement [ROE], etc.) as you maneuver for turning room or collision
course. You should accomplish this step at longer ranges in order to
minimize the degree of maneuvering required to deny the bandit an early
tally. The accepted standard is go pure pursuit NLT 10 nm. Remember,
the Eagle is a large airframe and maneuvering flashes the wing and
makes visual acquisition easier for the bandit. One of the more important
steps is to get an early tally on the bandit. Maneuvering against a bandit
is much easier when you perform it visually rather than with the radar.
The last step of the intercept is the endgame, which consists of a medium
range missile shot and/or the conversion to the stern for the identification
or the short range engagement.

Maneuver to Make Adjustments to Intercept

Turning Room

The maneuver to achieve offset for the appropriate aspect at a given range
may be thought of as a point-to-point. The amount of offset and direction
to go is dictated by the fighter’s present position in relation to the point
where the desired 10 nm horizontal offset is achieved; i.e., pure pursuit
curve. If you have an H or 17 aspect with sufficient range, then 40° offset
to the cold side may be acceptable. A 16 aspect at the same range may
only require 30° offset as shown in Figure D-25. A 16 aspect at 20 nm
gives fighter B approximately 6 nm of horizontal offset already
established. Fighter A (H aspect) has no turning room. Consequently,
since fighter B is closer to the desired horizontal offset, it does not need to
offset as much to the cold side. Range is significant in the equation for
offset. Figure D-26 shows that as range to the target decreases, a greater
amount of offset is required to get the horizontal turning room. Of course,
achieving some vertical displacement aids in gaining turning room for the
conversion (slice/chandelle).

AAM-2 D - 38


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_45.jpeg:
“a DESIRED TURN POINT
r\ 13AA/10 NM
~J A

b ‘ DESIRED TURN POINT

13AA/10 NM

\ FIGHTER A
AA=H

» FIGHTER B
AA=16L

AAM-02-25

Figure D - 25. Aspect Angle Versus Offset Requried.

AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_46.jpeg:
40

NM

TARGET

20 NM ; _X— DESIRED TURN POINT
ae | 13AA/10 NM

AAM-02-26

Figure D - 26. Range Versus Offset.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_47.jpeg:
Realize that initial fighter maneuvering to establish turning room may
not be 100% effective. During the intercept, turning room status must be
constantly evaluated and ATA changed as necessary. Figure D-27 shows
two fighters. Fighter A is hot (does not have sufficient turning room) and
fighter B is cold (has too much turning room). Fighter A has closed to 20
nm and still shows a 17 AA. This equates to only about 3 nm of horizontal
offset. In BFM, this would be sufficient. The fighter could, in fact, convert
and roll out behind the target. However, the G loading required will be
high, maybe much higher than advisable in a WX/night situation. Also, at
altitude, G may result in excessive energy bleedoff and a rollout behind
the target with opening (negative) closure. To establish more turning
room, the fighter should turn to the right to displace the target farther left
(the cold side) on the display. Being hot does not necessarily mean the
intercept cannot be completed. It does mean that higher G will be
required to maintain pure pursuit. Fighter B is cold. If fighter B does not
maneuver left, the end result will be too much horizontal turning room.
This will translate to excessive range at rollout behind the target.

13 AA/10 NM

|
L DESIRED TURNING ROOM
|
|
|
|
|
I

—~———_ Y__

FIGHTER B
14 AA/20 NM
FIGHTER A
17 AA/20 NM
AAM-02-27

Figure D - 27. Turning Room Adjustment.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_48.jpeg:
Pure Pursuit

Given that sufficient horizontal/vertical turning room has been
established, going pure pursuit is the actual process by which the fighter
is able to convert to the target’s stern (Figure D-28).

AAM-02-28

Figure D - 28. Pure Pursuit Timing.

In day VMC conditions, pure pursuit is normally taken no later than 10
nm in order to hide the aircraft and to gain an early tally. During
night/IMC that is not necessarily the case. Since there is no need to hide
the fighter, the pilot may elect to continue offsetting inside 10 nm range if
insufficient turning room is available. Realize that going pure at the first
opportunity will decrease offset without significantly generating turn until
short range. Just as in the discussion of turning room adjustment earlier,
a hotter intercept will require a higher G at endgame.

AAM-2 D - 42


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_49.jpeg:
Airspeed

The fighter would like to roll out behind the target with positive overtake.
Figure D-29 shows recommended values for fighter airspeed when
reaching the “go pure” point for each type of intercept. The speeds given
are comparisons to target KTAS. These speeds should be set no later than
the pure pursuit point, but recognize that to establish a fighter airspeed of
target TAS +200 KTAS 30 nm before the pure pursuit point wastes JP-8.

TGT TAS =e

» TGTTAS+
"Ay 50 KTAS
a
TARGET .
| fq TGTTAS +
—fy- “4 100 KTAS

* hl
Pct TAS +
150 KTAS

TGT TAS + <efhie—
200 KTAS

Figure D - 29. Fighter Speed Advantage Versus Vertical Position.

AAM-02-29


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1.

2.

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

Read the reference material.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_50.jpeg:
Fast Target

The fast target (Mach 1.1 or greater) poses problems when contemplating
a stern conversion. Offset sooner to establish lateral turning room. Due
to higher closure, offset the target farther to the cold side to assist in
building turning room. Increase fighter airspeed to approximately target
airspeed by the pure pursuit point. This will prevent rolling out behind
the target with negative Vc. Due to high line of sight rates presented by
the fast moving target, go pure pursuit at a 14 to 15 AA. Expect higher
than normal Vc on the pure pursuit schedule as a result of higher true
airspeed. Avoid the temptation to cool off the intercept by pulling back on
the power, as it will result in an energy deficient state behind the target.
Expect shorter weapon envelopes in the stern. Do not be lulled into
thinking that SRM employment is the only option. If outside SRM
parameters, think MRM.

Slow Target

The slow target profile generally assumes an aircraft of small radar return
moving at speeds much slower than normal fighter speeds. Slow targets
are often at low altitude. Placing the target on a high aspect approach
quadrant may be the only way to maintain lock for front aspect MRM
employment. Due to the target size, a VID may prove to be extremely
difficult before minimum range for weapon employment. Ifa stern
conversion is desired, offset at normal range or later and attempt a
look-up position (altitude permitting). Unless a 16 - H AA is seen on first
lock, the radar may have difficulty maintaining a lock. Expect to have to
reacquire the target several times during the intercept. Realize that, due
to its low airspeed, the target will not be moving down the display very
quickly. The vast majority of Vc will be attributable to the fighter. The
aspect angle will be very slow to decrease due to the low line of sight rate
of the target. Offsetting farther to the cold side will help. Due to low line
of sight, go pure pursuit inside 10 nm. If the fighter stays at tactical
airspeeds, expect high closure in the stern.

AAM-2 D - 44


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_51.jpeg:
Ve Control

This table shows range versus Vc for a co-speed horizontal intercept.
Closure and range should be cross-checked and evaluated to help
determine if a pure pursuit conversion is hot or cold.

RANGE ASPECT Ve
6 nm 10 700-800
5 nm 9 600-700
4 nm 7 500-600
3 nm 5 400-500
2nm 2 200-300
lnm T 100

If excessive Vc is displayed for the range (and the target is not at high
speed), then lag the target until Vc comes under control. If Vc is low for
target range, lead the target until values on the table match up.
Modulation of power may also be used to change Vc. If used, it should be
a small or momentary change. Too much or too long and you may end up
in a deficient energy state or with too much overtake. That covers the
basics of the intercepts. As with any part of air-to-air employment,
technique and personal preference play an important role.

Typical Intercept

An intercept consists of searching for the target, detecting the target,
sampling target parameters, sanitizing around the target, and then
sorting out the target formation in order to target the correct bandit.
After achieving the final lock, the stern conversion permits entry into the
visual arena from a position of advantage. Following the merge and the
conclusion of the engagement, a separation is performed in order to exit
the target area safely.

This section looks at the different phases, the tasks performed in each
phase, and the HOTAS to be used to perform those tasks.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_52.jpeg:
In long range search, it is reeommended to utilize 80 nm, 4/6 bar el scan,
120° sweep and frame store of 1. Be patient with the search pattern if
using interleaved PRF. Do not move it until each bar has a high and
medium PRF sweep (for 6 bar scan, wait for 12 sweeps). Keep the
acquisition symbols short of the target’s anticipated range. Cover the
required airspace at the designated range. Use the numbers associated
with the acquisition symbols to cover the required altitude. Overlap the
altitudes as you move the coverage up/down in your search pattern. If you
know the threat’s approach axis, use of 60° sweep is a viable option to
decrease frame time.

Detection

After acquiring the target and confirming that the group is your target,
azimuth bump to 30°/60° sweep to increase the refresh rate of the hits.
Keep the acquisition symbols at least 5 nm short of the target. You are
looking for long range contacts that will enable you to get started on your
sampling, sanitizing, and sorting.

Sample

This phase is extremely important. The task is to determine intercept
geometry, develop a plan of action, and build SA through repeated
sampling in order to determine how many targets are in the group and the
parameters (altitude, aspect, range) of each target. This is also the time
to ID the targets. Sampling is performed by repeated locks of
approximately 5 seconds or just long enough to get valid target
parameters displayed and to read them. STT/TWS/highlight are options
for this phase.

Targeting
If there are multiple groups, the flight lead will determine the priority

group for the flight to target. The flight will then sort within the priority
group for final locks.

AAM-2 D - 46


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_53.jpeg:
Sanitize

During the sampling phase, sanitize the area around the target for brief
periods between the sample locks. If needed, move the search pattern to
other possible threat axes or altitudes. This must be done in order to
prevent unseen bandits from entering the engagement.

Sampling, sanitizing, and sorting are accomplished in a near
simultaneous fashion by highly experienced aircrew. Less experienced/
proficient aircrews need to consciously realize which task is the current
priority, so they can optimize the radar for that task. For sanitizing, a
wide search volume is required. For sampling or sorting, optimize the
radar against the observed target(s) or against the smaller volume of
airspace around the target formation. STT is a pure sample mode.
Search is the purest surveillance mode while offering some target
information. Highlight and TWS offer a compromise between sampling
and sanitizing. Search sort, high data TWS and TWS sort (particularly
HDTWS sort) provide the enhanced capability to address the sorting
problem.

Sorting

Once the airspace has been sanitized and target parameters are known, it
is relatively easy to lock the correct target. The final lock range will be
briefed and must be adhered to in order to enable all flight members to see
the same radar picture and therefore lock the correct bandit.

The sort will be briefed. In general, you take the bandit that corresponds
to your flight position. For example, wingman on the left takes the bandit
on the left. Wingman takes trailers. As a single, take the bandit on the
side you are converting to. For example, you see a 17R aspect and offset
the targets to the left (targets on the right [cold side] of the radar). Your
final lock should be to the target on the left. For lead/trail, lock the trailer
to prevent yourself from being sandwiched.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_54.jpeg:
Intercept Geometry

If not already accomplished, after the final lock, position the aircraft for
the desired geometry. For cut-off geometry, center the dot and shoot at
the briefed range. For stern conversion, offset at the desired range and
monitor aspect angle and closure during the conversion. Go pure pursuit
NLT 10 nm and be prepared to shoot when the target is declared hostile.
Complete the intercept with the stern conversion and/or Fox 1/2/3 on the
bandits.

Intercept Results

There are four possible results from any intercept. The first is to attack
the bandit undetected. The second is when both the fighter and the target
see each other, which may result in a neutral start to the visual fight. The
third occurs when the fighter fails to see the target, but the target sees the
fighter. This results in either a kill by the target or a defensive
engagement for the fighter. The last is a missed intercept where neither
the fighter nor the target engage. The most important thing to remember
is that an intercept in itself is not the endgame, just a means to that end.
Always be ready to fight your best 1 v 1 BFM.

Separate

At the end of the engagement, turn to the called/briefed egress heading.
The pilot should select guns and position the search pattern to sanitize the
egress. Visually clear the area around the aircraft. Regain the briefed
formation and mutual support. After sufficient search in guns, go to SRM
and allow the WSO to take command of the radar. Go to MRM search
after sanitizing the short range area in front of the aircraft.

Be prepared to enter another engagement!

AAM-2 D - 48


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_55.jpeg:
HIGH ALTITUDE INTERCEPTS

High altitude intercepts present another unique problem. The target at
high TAS/Mach combined with the fighter aircraft turn performance at
altitude makes stern conversions impractical and a reattack not probable.
The head-on collision course intercept is the desired attack with an aspect
angle as close to H as possible to minimize missile maneuvering. One
method used in the F-15E community is as follows.

A/B climb to FL 350, accelerate to 1.3M
Increase aspect to H

At approximately Raero, center the dot
Shoot two missiles, five seconds apart

At 15 miles with 15 seconds missile TOF remaining, bunt to get
ready for the next target

Keep target illuminated for MRM time of flight—this may result
in high angle of attack and slow airspeed for the F-15E as the
nose is raised to keep the target inside elevation gimbals


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_56.jpeg:
LOW ALTITUDE INTERCEPTS

The low altitude intercept presents unique problems to the fighter. The
first problem is reduced target acquisition range both for the radar and
visually. The second is reduced missile envelopes and difficulty in
employing the gun. The target gains an advantage because the ground
becomes a threat to the fighter. In addition to ground impact killing the
fighter, the ground can cause the radar to break lock.

To counter the problems, fly a horizontal or a limited vertical combination
intercept. The conversion is started by 14 AA with a gradual descent to
avoid a square corner. Throughout the conversion, the fighter maintains
a speed greater than or equal to the target. An early tally is critical. Your
eyes are your most valuable tool. Look for shadows of the bandit to cue
you toa tally. Anticipate ridge lines because the bandit may highlight
himself crossing them or try to use them to hide from you. Task
saturation may very well become a problem. You still have to check six,
watch lead, and fly the jet. The biggest problem remains the ground.
Good crew coordination and directed crew responsibilities must be
established if you are to be successful and survive.

CREW COORDINATION

As you have seen in other lessons, most tasks in this aircraft can be
performed by either crew member. However, without prior coordination
the crew can find themselves fighting over control and not using this
aircraft to the maximum of its capabilities.

Radar
The radar (except for auto acquisition functions) can be controlled

effectively from either cockpit. In fact, there are specific mission tasks or
times when a particular individual must have control of the system.

AAM-2 D- 50


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_57.jpeg:
The closer you are to the ground, the more the pilot is concerned with
NOT hitting the ground and less with the radar. Therefore, the WSO
normally becomes the primary operator. Aside from those times when
radar control is task directed, the WSO normally operates the radar.
Short range engagements may dictate that the pilot have control of the
radar using the auto acq modes. While at longer ranges, either crew
member can successfully perform the functions.

The crew member not in control of the radar monitors the aircraft for
safety of flight and performs primary cockpit duties. He is responsible for
flight deconfliction and clearing for bandits. The bottom line is that if one
crew member is heads down in the radar, the other should be heads out
performing visual lookout and flight deconfliction.

Commentary

Intercockpit

Having two crew members in an airplane increases the capability to do
complex tasks, but it also increases the amount of communication
required on the intercom. Briefing key words for taking command and
changing command of tasking, as well as using accepted brevity terms,
cuts down on the amount of chatter in the cockpit. It is highly probable
that during the intercept the pilot will be looking out front or at the radar
and the WSO will be looking over his shoulder in an attempt to find the
bogey that GCI had said was following them, or keeping track of the rest
of the flight. Any change in situation demands intercockpit
communication. The longer a crew flies together, the better their crew
coordination will be. Nothing done by one crew member is unknown to the
other. Comments must be as brief as possible without causing confusion.
The key to successful intercockpit communication is crew coordination.
The key to crew coordination is talking about what can happen, what did
happen, how to prevent any unpleasant surprises, and those things you,
as a crew, did right.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_58.jpeg:
Intraflight

Once again, the goal is to limit the amount of communication to the
essential. Excessive talk only clutters up the frequency, confuses flight
members and may cause someone to miss a critical directive from lead or
ground control. There is nothing worse than losing a wingman because he
did not or could not hear your “break” call.

GCI/AWACS

It is the same problem as in intraflight. Be familiar with the brevity code
in AFTTP 3-1 and use it. Only the leader, or the aircraft responsible for
the intercept need acknowledge the GCI radio calls.

Visual Lookout

Visual lookout is the most important, single activity that will keep you
alive in any mission. On an intercept mission, the need for visual lookout
does not lessen as the attacker. In any fight it is the predictable aircraft
that gets beat. There is no other time when the crew is more predictable
than when flying an intercept. Someone in the aircraft must be clearing
at all times. Therefore, visual lookout is the responsibility of both crew
members. Additionally, periodic belly checks may be the difference
between being the shooter and getting shot. A rule of thumb would be
never turn more than 90° without making a belly check. AFTTP 3-1
covers the areas of responsibility for visual lookout. Key points to
remember are to clear the immediate threat area first, search both high
and low (a smart attacker avoids the horizon), and be disciplined in your
search.

AAM-2 D - 52


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_59.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

The amount of offset required to turn behind the target is

a. solely a function of aspect angle.

b. dependent on speed ratio, target AA, and altitude split.
c. ‘%the aspect angle on the hot side.

d. dependent on the target type.

Target drift

a. increases as the target approaches the CATA.

b. decreases as the target approaches the edge of the display.
c. is always toward the hot side.

d. is away from the CATA.

The quickest intercept is flown by

offsetting the target 40-50° cold of the CATA.

centering the MRM steering dot inside of 1.2 aero.

placing the target on the CATA.

maintaining the target on the center scribe of the radar display.

ae op

Horizontal intercepts are preferred

when you want to highlight the target on the horizon.
when your target is a “look up” only fighter.

only when in training.

at night/IMC or low altitude.

ae op


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-2

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_60.jpeg:
5. What is the CATA for a co-speed target with the listed aspect angles?

a. 15L
b. 18R
c. 17R
d. 14L
e. 16L

6. Write in the correct aspect angles for the listed approach quadrants.

a. Head-on

b. Front Quarter
c. Beam

d. Stern

7. What mode should the radar be in immediately following the turn to

the egress heading?
a. TWS

b. STT

c. MRM search
d. guns

8. Which two modes are used in the sampling/sanitizing phases?

a. STT/search

b. TWS/RAM

ce. Highlight/DTT
d. HDTWS/RAM

AAM-2 D- 54


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_61.jpeg:
[ok

ao op

caoop

ANSWERS

30 right
50 left
10 left
40 right
20 right

16-H
12-15
7-11
T-6

AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_62.jpeg:
AAM-2

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_63.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

AAM-02-30

Figure E - 1.

Using Figure F-1, to complete an intercept to the target’s 6 o’clock,
you should

a. vigorously turn right 45°, wait 45 seconds, then turn to obtain
offset.
. turn right to obtain offset and adjust using the key points.
c. turn left to obtain offset and adjust using the key points.
d. turn left to put the target on the CATA.

Using Figure F-1, this intercept is a setup.
a. front quarter

b. head-on

c. stern

d. beam


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_64.jpeg:
E
E
E
E

ieee

AAM-02-31
Figure E - 2.

3. To get on the correct horizontal pursuit curve for Figure F-2, turn

right to a reciprocal heading.
right to move target cold of CATA.
left to a reciprocal heading.

right to increase aspect.

Ro op

4. Use Figure F-2 to determine the CATA. It is

a. 20° right.
b. 10° right.
c. 10° left.
d. 20° left.

AAM-2 E-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_65.jpeg:
=
=
=
z

|

AAM-02-32

Figure E - 3.

Using Figure F-3, a turn of 10° to the right

a. will not immediately affect the ATA.
b. will not immediately affect the AA.
c. changes the CATA by 20°.

d. will not affect the HCA.

Using Figure F-3, at this point in the horizontal stern conversion

intercept, a turn is required to

put the target on the CATA.
establish lead pursuit.

generate cutoff.

move target 40-50° cold of CATA.

ao op

AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_66.jpeg:
AAM-2

7. All turns used to complete an intercept are
a. maximum G, 60° bank or more to arrive at the pursuit curve
quickly.
b. brisk turns of 45° or more.
c. just enough to get on the pursuit curve, limiting wing flashes.
d. prohibited inside 15 miles.
8. Control of the radar
a. should always be with the crew member not flying the aircraft.
b. should always be with the WSO.
c. varies with the flight regime and mission.
d. rests with the most experienced individual.


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_67.jpeg:
Figure E - 4.

9. Using Figure F-4, if you want to perform a combination stern
conversion and attack the target shown here, your first move is to

put the target 50-55° cold.

turn right to decrease aspect to 14, then slice down.

put the target on the CATA then pull at 30° antenna depression.
turn left to decrease aspect to 14, then slice down.

po op

10. During aerial attack maneuvers

a. the WSO directs weapons employment.

b. the pilot keeps the WSO advised of all heading changes greater
than 40°, altitude changes of 5000 feet, and airspeed changes of
50 knots.

nonessential chatter should be kept to a minimum.

d. only the WSO looks out.

©


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_68.jpeg:
eye

(~ 17L 175

oe
Cc

AAM-02-34

Figure E - 5.

11. Using Figure F-5, visual ID is required before firing ordnance.
Intelligence says that older aircraft are attacking. At 20 nm from the
border, with this situation, your best option is

a vertical/chandelle conversion to the stern.
a long range AIM-7 and split.

climb to 80,000 feet and do a slice attack.

a horizontal conversion to the stern.

Re op

AAM-2 E-6


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_69.jpeg:
A/B
ASE
ATA
AWACS
AZ
BFM
BRA(A)
CATA
el

FL

GCI

HCA
HDTWS
HOTAS
HUD

ID

IMC

KTAS

GLOSSARY
Aspect angle
Afterburner
Allowable steering error
Antenna train angle
Airborne warning and control system
Azimuth
Basic fighter maneuver
Bearing, range, and altitude (aspect)
Collision antenna train angle
Elevation
Flight level
Ground controlled intercept
Head
Heading crossing angle
High data rate track while scan
Hands on throttle and stick
Head-up display
Identification
Instrument meteorological conditions
Knots true airspeed

Left

AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
DEFINITIONS/TERMS

The radar is a two-dimensional picture of a three-dimensional event. The
information displayed on the MPD/MPCD air-to-air displays helps you to
develop the picture of the intercept geometry. The information covered in
RDR-2 discusses the air-to-air radar depictions. This text concentrates on
interpreting the information and employing the F-15E in the intercept
environment. Before discussing “how to,” the definitions of terms used are
discussed.

Intercept

An intercept is the means by which a fighter aircraft maneuvers from
beyond visual range to a position from which to employ ordnance, visually
identify the target, and/or enter the visual fight arena. The intercept can
be flown using GCI/AWACS information, on-board radar information, or a
combination of the two.

NOTE
Peripheral pushbutton legends and some air-to-air display legends have

been omitted from MPD/MPCD displays throughout the text for ease of
presentation.



Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_70.jpeg:
M Mach

MCM Multiple command manual
MPCD Multipurpose color display
MPD Multipurpose display
MRM Medium range missile
NLT Not later than

nm Nautical miles

PRF Pulse repetition frequency
R Right

ROE Rule(s) of engagement

SA Situation awareness

SRM Short range missile

STT Single target track

T Tail

TAS True airspeed; calibrated airspeed corrected for temperature

and pressure

TD Target designator

TDC Target designator control
TOF Time of flight

TWS Track-while-scan

Ve Closing velocity

VID Visual identification

AAM-2 F-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_71.jpeg:
VMC

WSO

Visual meteorological conditions
Weapon system officer

Weather

AAM-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_72.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_8.jpeg:
Heading Crossing Angle (HCA)

HCA is the angle formed by the projected flight paths of the target and the
fighter (Figure D-1). The maximum possible HCA is 180° (head-on). HCA
is dependent on both the fighter and target headings and changes when
either aircraft maneuvers.

Lethal

FIPIRIM IP

AAM-02-01

Figure D - 1. Heading Crossing Angle.

AAM-2 D-2


Text from AAM-2_Intercepts_page_9.jpeg:
Target Relative Heading Vector

During STT and TWS modes, the target displays a “stick” which shows
the relative target heading in relation to the fighter’s heading

(Figure D-2). The relative heading vector should only be used as a guide
to the target’s general heading and for indicating target maneuvering. It
should not be used to assess the target’s magnetic heading or aspect
angle.

| TGT
| RELATIVE
| HDG

AAM-02-02

Figure D - 2. Target Relative Heading Vector.


