Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-6
DEFENSIVE BASIC FIGHTER
MANEUVERS

APRIL 2000

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_10.jpeg:
Positional Geometry

Range, aspect angle and angle-off (heading crossing angle (HCA)) describe
the positional relationship between two aircraft (Figure D-2). These three
factors dictate which aircraft enjoys a positional advantage, and how
much of an advantage it is.

ANGLE-OFF
(HCA)

ASPECT ANGLE
(TARGET TO
ATTACKER)

AAM-06-02

Figure D - 2. Range, Aspect and Angle Off.
Range - the distance between two aircraft.
Aspect Angle - the relative position of the attacker to the target without
regard to the attacker's heading. Strictly speaking, aspect angle is
measured from the tail of the target to the position of the attacker.
Angle Off - (Heading Crossing Angle or HCA) the angle between the

longitudinal axis of the attacker and the longitudinal axis of the defender,
or simply the difference in their headings.

AAM-6 D-4


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_11.jpeg:
Attack Geometry

There are three available attack pursuit courses: lead, lag and pure
(Figure D-3). Both nose position and lift vector relative to a defender
contribute to the pursuit course that the bandit may fly. These

geometries are 3-dimensional.

In-plane - If the bandit is in the defender’s plane of motion, the position of
the bandit’s nose determines the pursuit course. If the bandit points at
the defender, the bandit is in pure pursuit. If the bandit points behind the
defender, the bandit is in lag pursuit. With the nose pointed in front of
the defender (such as the case in a gunshot), the bandit is in lead pursuit.

/
7 Pea
,
, w7 ae
U vo” oer
a
/ ae oc
(-
cg of PURE Y f
y Z
me LO
a [ f’ _ LEAD
Zi gt
-
é yt
4
! 4 uc
I! 7 Pa
' ‘ -
7 i
I 7 ge
! Ze 7
I ’
I , x
I 4 ¢
1 ‘ ,
’ ¢
1, ,
17 ¢
’
17 i;
Ir,
Il ¢
0
AAM-06-03

Figure D - 3. Pursuit Curves.

AAM-6


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_12.jpeg:
Out-of-plane (vertical) - When the attacker is out of the defender’s plane of
motion (POM), the attacker’s pursuit course is determined by where the
present lift vector will position the nose when the attacker reenters the
defender’s turn plane. For example, if forced out-of-plane by a defender’s
turn, an attacker may have the nose pointed behind the defender during
the reposition. After gaining sufficient turning room, if the attacker pulls
far enough in front of the defender to arrive back in-plane with the nose in
front, then the attacker is in lead pursuit. The same holds true for pure or
lag pursuit.

Weapon Employment Zone (WEZ)

The WEZ is an area in front of the attacker, bounded by his weapons min
and max ranges, where he may successfully employ weapons. It is
determined by the attacker’s ordnance capabilities and is affected by
airspeed, altitude, and aircraft turn capability. The defender can, to a
degree, control aspect, angle-off and range which further affects the
attacker’s weapons capabilities. See AFTTP 3-1 Vol I for specific weapon
employment zones.

Turning Room/Turn Circle

Turning Room

Turning room is the separation between two aircraft that can be used to
accelerate and decrease range, or to turn and enter the turn circle thus
decreasing aspect and angle-off. Turning room can exist in either the
lateral or vertical plane.

Turn Circle

The turn circle is a mental projection of the defensive turn over time.
Obviously, if the defender changes G or airspeed, this imaginary circle’s
radius changes accordingly. It is important to recognize when the attacker
enters the defender’s turn circle. Once the attacker has entered the
defender’s turn circle, the defender can no longer turn hard enough to
move the attacker forward of the 3/9 line. Prior to the attacker entering
the turn circle, the defender can generate angles at will.

There are visual cues that allow the defender to recognize when the
attacker has entered the turn circle. When the attacker stops moving
forward on the canopy during a defensive break turn and begins to move
aft, the attacker has entered the turn circle. In other words, the aspect
angle remains constant or begins to decrease.

AAM-6 D-6


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_13.jpeg:
Vertical Turning

Turn rate and radius are affected by the earth’s gravity. Any time the
aircraft’s lift vector is above the horizon, turn rate is decreased and turn
radius is increased. If a loop were performed at a constant (cockpit) G, the
flight path would scribe an “egg” shape in the sky (Figure D-4). A 4 G loop
would result in effective radial G (Gr) loadings as indicated in the figure.
From the cockpit perspective, a 4 G turn at the top of a loop “turns like” a
5 G horizontal turn.

Figure D - 4. Vertical Turning.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_14.jpeg:
If an aircraft is able to turn with the lift vector below the horizon, turn
rate increases and radius decreases (assuming constant airspeed and
cockpit G). The converse is true during turns with lift vector above the
horizon (see Figure D-5). From a vertical (directly above) perspective, the
downhill turning aircraft turns inside the aircraft turning uphill. A
downhill turn at key points in a BFM engagement may improve relative
turning performance compared to the adversary.

_—_
a oe
DOWNHILL TURN UPHILL TURN
>=,
<a

AAM-06-05

Figure D - 5. Comparison of Downhill and Uphill Turns (View From
Above).

AAM-6 D-8


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_15.jpeg:
Turns performed in the “pure” vertical (i.e., no lateral or horizontal
component) deny a trailing (similar) aircraft, at a lower energy state, the
capability to counter the result of the energy differential by performing an
oblique or horizontal turn (Figure D-6).

4

AAM-06-06

Figure D - 6. Vertical vs Oblique Turning.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_16.jpeg:
Control Zone

The control zone (Figure D-7) is a position along the defender’s turn circle
from which an attacker can maintain pressure on or “control” the
defender. From the control zone, the attacker can move into a weapons
employment zone once achieving an energy advantage or the defender
makes a mistake.

The dimensions of the control zone are defined in general terms by the
adversary’s weapons and the defender’s aircraft performance. It is
important to recognize weapons envelopes and develop judgement on how
far away, in terms of time, an attacker is from the weapons employment
zone. The inner limit of the control zone will allow time for an attacker to
react to defensive maneuvers, position for an accurate gun shot and allow
minimum weapons range or training rule minimum separation. It also
allows the attacker to reposition the nose to establish a lead pursuit curve
to enter a WEZ. The closer an attacker gets to the inner limit, the more
important it is to have aspect angle, angle off and closure under control as
a high energy defender can develop high LOS rates at close range. At the
outer limit of the control zone, an attacker can still apply pressure without
giving the defender opportunities for regaining energy or changing the
fight. Since the outer limit depends on the defender’s turn circle, it is
important to maintain your energy and G-capability.

Considering F-15E performance and energy management at medium
altitude we can establish some generic physical boundaries on the control
zone (Figure D-7).

20° AA

+30 HCA

AAM-06-07

Figure D - 7. The Control Zone.

AAM-6 D-10


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_17.jpeg:
This control zone is valid for F-15E vs F-15E BFM. When encountering a
BFM situation against a different adversary (F-16, F-18, MiG-29, Su-27,
etc.) understanding the adversary’s capabilities will help you determine
your own control zone.

DEFENSIVE BFM

The objective in defensive BFM is to survive the attack. You must deny or
defeat the attacker’s weapons opportunities and then generate range,
closure, aspect or angle off problems. The first step is to defeat any
weapons in the air and then deny the attacker entry into a weapons
employment zone. To do this you must be knowledgeable of the attacker’s
aircraft and weapon systems capabilities. The most fundamental concern
is to maintain the tally on the attacker. You cannot successfully analyze
and assess the potential of a bandit you do not see. Energy management
is crucial during DBFM. If a bandit has similar capabilities, you must fly
more efficiently and/or exploit any BFM mistakes to defeat that bandit.

Given the time to evaluate all the factors (range, overtake, pilot skill,
aircraft type, etc.) of an attack, the pilot can devise a defensive plan
custom-made for the particular situation. Unfortunately, pilots do not do
their best creative thinking in a high-G turn while looking over their
shoulder at someone trying to kill them. What is needed then is a simple
strategy that is easily remembered and executed. Even though it may not
be the best scheme for every situation, it should guarantee survival by
denying the attacker valid shot parameters. The idea is to force a reaction
by the bandit and not allow the positional advantage for the bandit to
continue.

The defensive strategies described in this section assume a worst case
situation of the bandit at your 5 to 7 o’clock position, with overtake, and a
tally. Obviously, if you know that any of these conditions do not exist,
then you can modify the plan based on the additional information you
have. However, if you are not certain, then it is in your best interest to
assume the worst case and defend accordingly. The elements of these
defensive countermoves will be analyzed with respect to the range and
nose position of the attacker.

Initial Moves

The defender’s initial maneuver generally determines the outcome of the
engagement. You must react quickly and decisively.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_18.jpeg:
When the bandit is at long range with low closure, an extension may be
appropriate to deny any weapons envelopes. The danger in this option is
that accurate determination of range may be difficult, particularly when
the attacking aircraft is small. If you incorrectly analyze range and/or
closure then the attacker may already be in weapons parameters. As this
is not the desired outcome, we will consider another option.

If the bandit is visually acquired at a range of 2 nm or greater, you can
turn to merge high aspect or possibly engage offensively. With sufficient
energy, you can counter any split-plane maneuvering by pulling into the
bandit’s plane of motion.

If you first detect the bandit inside of 2 nm, your first priority is to deny or
defeat all weapons employment opportunities. Your best opportunity for
survival is to defeat weapons while they are still on the rail. To deny
weapons employment you must rapidly increase aspect and angle off while
decreasing range. Perform an unloaded roll to rapidly bring your lift
vector on or slightly below the bandit and then initiate a turn based on the
bandit’s range, aspect, ordnance and overtake. The closer the bandit is to
weapons parameters, the harder your turn must be. Allow your airspeed
to bleed toward corner velocity during the first part of the turn. Gs during
the first part of the turn are based on the attacker’s range, but in almost
all cases you should achieve at least 6 Gs in the initial turn.

The closer the attacker is to a weapons employment zone, the harder your
turn must be (up to maximum allowable G). You must generate a high
turn rate to rotate your vulnerable cone and a small turn circle to deny
the attacker an early entry for BFM. If your initial airspeed is well above
your sustained corner, you must reduce power (and possibly extend the
speedbrake) while setting your lift vector and pulling to the bandit. As
you approach corner velocity, retract the speedbrake and increase power
up to maximum AB to sustain your turn. If the OWS beeper is on and you
do not feel slight buffet, you are too fast. If you feel moderate buffet with
no OWS beeper, you are too slow. In either case, select the appropriate
power setting and orient your lift vector for maximum performance turns.
As you initiate your turn, employ chaff and/or flares.

During the turn, it is imperative that you monitor the bandit’s position.
The purpose of the turn is to generate aspect and/or closure problems for
the attacker. If this is occurring, the attacker will move forward from the
5 or 7 o'clock position toward your nose. If the attacker is not moving
forward, you must turn harder by slowing toward corner velocity and
increasing G.

AAM-6 D-12


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_19.jpeg:
A hard turn against an in-plane bandit will generate an overshoot if the
bandit does nothing to acquire additional turning room (i.e., perform
BFM). How much of an overshoot depends on the initial aspect, angle-off,
closure, range and the amount of turn generated by the defending fighter.
The more you can increase any of the above factors, the greater the
overshoot will be (Figure D-8). It is to your advantage to generate a large
angle-off problem for the attacker as early as possible. If in doubt, use a
break turn versus a hard turn.

YO
re, \ /

HIGHER ASPECT/ANGLE OFF Vs LOW ASPECT/ANGLE OFF

\ AN

"BREAK" TURN vs "HARD" TURN

AAM-06-08

Figure D - 8. Break Turn Effectiveness vs Angle Off/Aspect/G-Loading.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-6, Feburary, 1999

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_20.jpeg:
Visual References for Defensive BFM

The weapons employment zone you are concerned with in training is
defined by range, aspect and nose position. Developing a feel for range
comes with experience and should be practiced on all weapon system
checks. Some rules of thumb for the F-15E are: anti-collision beacons
visible at 2500-3000 feet, square intakes discernable at 3000-3500 feet
and external tanks at about 6000 feet.

Pursuit geometry is determined by attacker’s nose position. If an attacker
is in lead pursuit, the attacker’s nose is pointing in front of your aircraft
and you see the bottom of the attacker’s aircraft. When in lag pursuit, the
nose is pointing behind you and you see the top of the aircraft. Depending
on environmental considerations, aspect and pursuit geometry may be
difficult to determine. Aircraft structures such as external tanks or
missiles (lead) and canopy, speed brake or top of engine bays (lag) provide
valuable visual cues. A pure pursuit bandit is nose on and typically closer
than estimated.

You can determine the aspect angle problem you are creating for the
attacker and the attacker’s position relative to the control zone by
reference to your aircraft structure (Figures D-9 and D-10). A nose-on
bandit inside of 9000 feet and aft of your wing tip is approaching a WEZ.
When you are looking over your aileron at the attacker, the attacker is in
the control zone (about 30° aspect angle), assuming appropriate ranges.
Your goal, defensively, is to keep the bandit forward of the wing tip (out of
the control zone) unless that bandit has a lot of heading crossing angle.

Additional references must be used to determine the bandit’s aspect

because you are rarely straight and level while performing BFM. The top
of the vertical tails also equates to approximately 30° aspect.

AAM-6 D-14


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_21.jpeg:
60° 90°
AAM-06-09

Figure D - 9. Aspect - FCP.

al \_
TS

80°
40°

AAM-06-10

Figure D - 10. Aspect - RCP.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_22.jpeg:
Remember, even with all aspect ordnance, the bandit generally cannot
shoot you if you are outside of the bandit’s canopy bow (F-15E) in the
visual arena. If you can visualize being outside of the bandit’s canopy bow
then you have 30° + of angle off (Figure D-11). Additional angle off
references (for an attacker in the control zone) are:

Length (fuselage) = Width (wingspan) = 45°
Length = 2 x Width; 70°

2 x length = width; 15° (you are inside the attacker’s canopy bow and
approaching the HUD)

<K

+

AAM-06-11

Figure D - 11. Angle Off or Heading Crossing Angle References.

AAM-6 D-16


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_23.jpeg:
Analyzing the Fight

You can control an engagement in which you are defensive. By making an
appropriate initial move, you can defeat the first attack and force the
bandit to maneuver. An aware bandit will make some BFM maneuver to
help solve the problems you generated in your initial move. The quicker
you can generate BFM problems, the more aggressive and energy
depleting the bandit’s subsequent BFM will be. By driving the fight you
can more accurately predict the bandit’s follow-on maneuvers and assess
the bandit’s potential while preparing for your next maneuver.

First, determine the effectiveness of your initial turn. You should observe
the bandit moving forward from the 5 or 7 o'clock position. If the bandit is
not moving forward you must increase your turn rate (use more G and/or
get closer to corner velocity) to increase aspect and angle off. Now watch
the bandit’s nose position to predict intentions. If the bandit is
established in lead or pure pursuit, continue your turn and expect a high
aspect pass. If the bandit is in plane, prepare for the front quarter gun
attack. Approaching maximum gun range, jink and then look for the
opportunity to separate.

If you see an out of plane maneuver, the bandit is looking to build turning
room for a subsequent attack. A good reference for building out of plane
turning room is that the bandit starts moving toward the side of the
canopy. Your options now are based on your own energy state. If you are
still at relatively high energy, unload and roll to reorient your lift vector
on the bandit, then turn to increase aspect and angle off. If your energy
state is low and the bandit is not threatening, perform an opt turn, or
extend to regain energy. Be careful not to convey your intentions by
rolling wings level. Maintaining the bank does not hurt your acceleration.
It also helps you maintain the tally. Reduce your nose low attitude at the
completion of the maneuver. Do not lose sight! Roll the aircraft or use
quick check turns to keep the bandit in sight.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_24.jpeg:
During the extension, you must continue to monitor the bandit’s actions.
As you extend away, or when the bandit solves the BFM problem, expect
the bandit to bring the nose in-plane again. Assess range and closure, and
if threatened, turn hard into the bandit. Timing is critical here. If you
allow the bandit into your vulnerable cone inside any weapons ranges, you
may die. Be cognizant of the airspeed you gained during the extension,
and avoid a high-speed, high G, low rate turn. If you see that the bandit
is out of weapons parameters due to range or lack of overtake, your best
move is to continue your separation. Remember that these initial
defensive reactions are designed to help you survive the first moments of
the attack when you acquire the bandit and know little more than the
bandit’s range and nose position. As you learn more about adversary
potential and capability, alter your defense accordingly. Attempt to have
the bandit react to you by being aggressive.

The initial move should force the bandit to overshoot. If the bandit has
good turn performance the overshoot will occur with low angle off. If the
bandit’s turn performance is poor, the angle off will be fairly high. You
now predict any capabilities and intentions based on angle off and aspect.
Against a superior turning bandit, you must continue the hard turn and
wait for a mistake or for a depletion of energy.

If the bandit has its nose in lead but is at low aspect with little or no
apparent closure then the bandit is using positional geometry for closure
and probably arcing for a gunshot. Typically, an arcing bandit will be
nose low in lead and below the horizon. Since the bandit is not
threatening, an extension maneuver may be appropriate depending on
your energy state and the bandit’s weapon load and range, or simply
rotate your lift vector slightly above the bandit while continuing the turn.
This will generate turning room that the low energy, nose low bandit
cannot use but that you can. When sufficient turning room is available
(about 4000 feet), reorient your lift vector to high six and pull to a
separation. Be cautious not to over-rotate and pull back in to a high angle
gunshot. You must pull to a point above the bandit’s aircraft.

If the bandit has fairly high energy, as evidenced by good nose rate and
decreasing angle off from low aspect, you must continue the same
maneuvers as the initial move. Be alert for canopy motion to stop and
then start moving backwards as you turn. The bandit is probably
accelerating in lag (you see the top of the aircraft) or maneuvering for a
lag reposition. You must keep the bandit in sight and prepare for any turn
back to pure pursuit. The key here is to make your hard turn at the same
time or before the bandit. Do not let a bandit reduce angle off while at low
aspect or you will die.

AAM-6 D-18


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_25.jpeg:
Prior to discussing bandits at 9000 feet, 6000 feet and 3000 feet, there are
some general comments that cover all three.

The most common BFM error is losing sight of the bandit. This is often
due to poor lookout technique and bad seat position. Simply attempting to
look straight out the top of the canopy without shifting your body is
uncomfortable, if not impossible, under high G. Try to sit as far back in
the seat as possible and then lean forward and away from the turn. In
this manner you can put your shoulder in the back of the seat for support
and easily see out the top of the canopy or over the top of the seat. This
also allows you to use the larger muscles of the back for movement and
support instead of the neck muscles.

Another common error is lift vector control. Your lift vector should be on
or slightly below the bandit during the initial break turn. Additionally,
max allowable G, chaff/flares and power modulation (2 handed BFM) need
to be used.

A final overall error is failure to analyze the bandit’s pursuit geometry.
Lead and pure pursuit may be hard to discern initially. If the bandit is in
lead, be prepared to jink out-of-plane against a snapshot. Ifthe bandit
stays in pure pursuit, you should expect an overshoot with 90-120°
angle-off, and probably a pass within 2500 feet. If you see lag, the bandit
probably understands how to do BFM! Although a poorer turning bandit
may have to use lag pursuit, continue to fly your best BFM and capitalize
on any errors.

Bandit at 9000 Feet

If acquired in the 5 to 7 o’clock area, at 9000 feet, and presumed to have
overtake, the bandit is near your turn circle. This means that you have
less time to generate angles before the bandit is able to match your turn
rate.

As the bandit is close to valid weapons parameters, you need to
immediately break turn with max allowable G. If ordnance is fired, a
break turn, chaff and flare employment, and immediately slowing to
corner velocity is a must. The goal is to bring the missile to 90° aspect as
quickly as possible and maintain a high LOS with the missile. The range
and aspect at launch dictates how energy depleting your break turn must
be.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_26.jpeg:
If the attacker’s nose is in lead, you should attempt to analyze the aspect.
A bandit aft of the wing line may be arcing for closure due to lack of
airspeed. In this case you can either attempt to extend away, which may
lead to a missile shot, or continue to turn hard and meet the bandit with
high angles. When a bandit is forward of the wing line, or has the
overtake to effect closure regardless of aspect, you should turn hard with
your lift vector on the bandit to maximize angles and closure. Be prepared
to deny a snapshot.

If the bandit’s nose comes off, the BFM problem you are able to generate
will not be as severe. In other words, generating sufficient aspect to
counter the bandit will be more difficult. If the bandit goes deep to lag, an
optimum turn or extension is probably your best move. However, a bandit
that recognizes your extension early on will quickly drive to your 6 o'clock
and make maintaining a tally difficult. The alternative is to keep turning
at reduced G (4 to 5 Gs) to keep the fight tight, force the bandit to
reposition and bleed off energy attempting to get inside your turn circle.
This should be done at optimum turn (18-22 units) AOA.

Bandit at 6000 Feet

If the bandit is acquired at 5 to 7 o’clock, 6000 feet, and presumed to be
closing, action is critical because any missile-equipped aircraft is already
within weapons parameters.

If the bandit is nose on, a break turn is mandatory. Apply back stick to
achieve maximum allowable G, while modulating power to attain corner
velocity. At the initiation of the break turn, employ chaff and flares.
Approaching corner velocity, select full AB. If you are within 40 knots of
corner or below at the initiation of the turn, maintain full AB. You must
provide a rate problem for both the adversary and any missiles. Assessing
LOS movement is essential to determine if your turn is “working.” If a
missile is in the air, deselect AB and deploy more chaff and flares. Tally is
critical. If the pilot loses tally and calls blind, the WSO is now responsible
for directing defensive maneuvering while talking the pilot’s eyes onto the
bandit.

AAM-6 D - 20


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_27.jpeg:
A bandit that starts at very low aspect and immediately goes to lead
pursuit as you attempt to generate angles is either going for guns or does
not really understand BFM. If the bandit is aft of your wing line and in
lead pursuit, keep your lift vector on and deploy chaff/flares. Unless the
bandit is appreciably nose-off, your turns should be at max allowable G,
with power in mil and deploying chaff/flares. The turn should move the
bandit forward on your canopy. Continue this maximum turn until the
bandit approaches maximum gun range. Then unload and roll to put your
lift vector out of the bandit’s plane of motion and jink. When the bandit’s
nose is no longer in lead, or the bandit is significantly out of plane, unload
and roll to put your lift vector back in a plane parallel with the bandit and
continue the turn.

If the bandit overshoots or repositions, assess the bandit’s movement and
either reverse or reduce G to execute an optimum turn (18-22 units AOA)
to put the bandit in lag, or turn another 30° or so and extend. When
coming back from an extension, you need to turn hard with chaff/flares.
This turn can now be more vertical. Now you are looking for clues of the
bandit’s energy state. How fast is the bandit’s nose coming up? Is the
bandit trapped in lag? Is the nose caught low and inside, out of energy?
Are the bandit’s stabs fully deflected? Your next turn will be above the
bandit until the overshoot and then downhill. When you have the bandit
trapped and out of energy, you can also start an optimum turn (rate fight)
and further neutralize the bandit. Ultimately, you want to separate or
gain the offensive. Generally, it takes less time to separate than go
offensive.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_28.jpeg:
Bandit with Insufficient Turn Rate

There are two possible reasons for an attacker to go to lag. The first is
that the bandit has insufficient turn rate available to match your turn. If
an inferior turning adversary does not establish lead at sufficient range
against a superior turning aircraft, the attacker will be forced to lag. You
should analyze the aircraft you are fighting (both type and energy state).
If you know you have a turn performance advantage against the bandit
and have forced lag pursuit, keep turning (Figure D-12).

AAM-06-12

Figure D - 12. Superior Turn Performance.

AAM-6 D - 22


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_29.jpeg:
Bandit with Superior Turn Rate

A superior turning bandit may use excess energy to drive to your blind
cone, and then slow the aircraft down by turning harder to point and shoot
unobserved. This maneuver is referred to as a “lag corner” (Figure D-13).

“SG

{Fs AAM-06-13

Figure D - 13. Lag Corner.

To counter a lag corner, turn hard to rotate your vulnerable cone and
maintain a tally on the bandit. The farther back the bandit is, the more
effective your turn will be. Once you have increased aspect to the point
that you can maintain a tally, unload to a sustained G (light buffet) and
keep the fight tight. Continue bleeding the bandit’s energy by forcing
repositions out of plane. Be prepared for a guns defense.

Bandit at 3000 Feet
With the bandit at 5 to 7 o’clock and 3000 foot range, action is critical.

Once again, this discussion will be centered on the initial tally at this very
low aspect.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

COVER

DEFENSIVE BASIC FIGHTER MANEUVERS
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to an understanding of the successful
application of basic fighter maneuvers (BFM). It will familiarize you with
the fundamentals of BFM and factors affecting their performance in the
air-to-air arena. It will provide knowledge needed to effectively employ
the F-15E against an airborne adversary.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeeccceeseeecesceceseeesssaeeeessaeeceseeeessaeesseeeeensas A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........0..eeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. ee eeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oe cecccccceessseeeceessseeecceessaeeeccesssseeeseessaeeeceeesaeeeseeesaeeesensaaeees D-1
FEN DD OR PET QUIZ: corse cess sane sas suis cass ans cowie sass onc aan news cents aaa sen eae aes ais ase N/A
GLOSSARY. eeeccceesceeceseeeesseeecesacecesaeeessaeesesaeecesaeesessaeesesaeesenaees F-1


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_30.jpeg:
At nose-on you should execute a break turn and attempt to force the
bandit into lag or an overshoot situation. If there is any doubt about nose
position, assume the bandit has established sufficient lead for a gunshot.
You must build angles and increase closure to compound the bandit’s
problem.

Nose in lead requires the initiation of some type of gun defense. A
successful gun attack requires the attacker to be in range, have sufficient
lead and be in your plane of motion. If the attacker has satisfied the first
two requirements, the only option left is to fly out of the attacker’s plane
of motion and bullet stream. How much out of plane is a function of how
long the bandit can maintain a gun attack position. The determining
factors are aspect and overtake. The higher the aspect angle, the more
overtake the attacker will have, assuming you are turning with lift vector
on the bandit. Since the attacker’s position will not be static, as long as
the nose remains in lead the attacker will continue to close and approach
a flight path overshoot. The lower the aspect, the longer the attacker will
maintain a gun firing position because of the lower angular closure and
less HCA.

A gun’s break, or jink, is called for in the higher aspect situation. The
assumption is made here that sufficient aspect has been generated to force
an overshoot, but the attacker has enough lead established approaching
the overshoot point. You must quickly get out of the bandit’s plane of
motion. How much you place your lift vector out of plane depends on the
attacker’s aspect. At 135° of aspect, a roll of probably 30° should be
sufficient. At 45° of aspect, you should do a quick unloaded roll a full 90°
out of the attacker’s plane.

The direction of roll is dependent on several factors: the attacker’s relative
position and vector, the attacker's energy state, your airspeed and your
follow-on intentions. To rotate out of plane, you need to generate turn
rate, and to do this you need airspeed. The rate of your turn is dependent
on radial G, and the effect of gravity is more pronounced at slower speeds.

Your follow-on intentions also determine the direction of break. As
someone closes to gun range, they approach your 3/9 line. If you can
defeat the gun attack, you can then begin to challenge for the 3/9
advantage. The best way to do this is to slow your forward velocity vector
by rotating up and creating a severe closure problem for the attacker.
Remember though, you must first defeat the gun attack by breaking
out-of-plane effectively. Also, you may have to go down in order to
generate sufficient turn rate, even at the expense of a counteroffensive
opportunity. The key here is that after changing your plane of motion

AAM-6 D - 24


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_31.jpeg:
(POM), you need to turn back into the bandit to continue increasing
closure and angle problems.

Gun track defense is called for when the attacker is in a position of low
aspect and controllable overtake so that one single plane defensive move
will not take the attacker out of gun’s position. The problem is to defeat
the initial gun attack with an out-of-plane maneuver while attempting to
force an unsolvable BFM problem that forces the attacker out of this very
lethal position. Guns defense should be unpredictable to the attacker but
predictable to the crew. Have a plan and crew brief it.

An effective guns defense, or jink, consists of three moves. First unload to
break your AOA. This allows you to roll the aircraft quickly. The second
part is a roll to orient your lift vector out of the plane of motion of the
fight. Third, a break turn into your new plane of motion moves the
aircraft out of the attacker’s bullet stream, thus spoiling the shot and
forcing the attacker to maneuver toward the new plane of the fight.

There are several major errors that are often made during any gun
defense. The first is losing tally. To avoid doing this, you should note the
opponent’s position when you initiate the first plane change and predict
where the bandit will go during your defensive maneuver. When you
reorient your lift vector, it may make the bandit move from one side of
your canopy to the other. Know where to find the bandit!

The second most common guns defense error is not initiating the plane of
motion change early enough. Do not wait until the bandit is in gun range
before initiating the plane change. Lead this range by 1-2 seconds (actual
range depends on aspect, closure, and ordnance). This will allow you to
unload, roll and pull to a new plane of motion before the attacker turns
the gun on.

A third error is attempting to roll at high AOA. A rapid plane change is
essential and a slow roll rate may be deadly. Reduce AOA first to achieve
the quickest roll rate, unless the defense is initiated at sufficient airspeed
to guarantee an acceptable roll and turn rate. Surviving a gun attack
takes skill and patience; the most critical error is giving up and settling
into a constant plane turn.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_32.jpeg:
A fourth error is not getting out of the plane of the fight. While 30-45°
may be sufficient to spoil a high angle gun shot, it is easy to counter for a
bandit at low aspect attempting a guns track. Effectively, all that
happens when you jink in or too near the current plane of motion is that
you solve range problems for the bandit. Think skinny. Related to this is
the tendency to not hold the jink long enough to actually get out of plane.
When you do the break turn, you should note the bandit moving toward
your canopy rails as a key that you are moving out of the plane of motion.

Another error is jinking up with an energy state that is too low. This
causes problems when it is time to jink again. The key is that a single
jink does not make a bandit go away, so you must be prepared for an
attempt by the bandit to solve the problem and you must be prepared to
jink again. Be patient and never give up!

If the attacker’s BFM is timely and effective, and preserves nose/tail
separation, you should continue to pull up into the attacker’s new position
to create a closure problem. As a guide, the move into the vertical should
gain positional advantage. If this move will not gain positional
advantage, a better counter would be an extension while the attacker is
nose off. Attempt to force an “out of sync” situation by pulling toward the
bandit’s belly side, forcing repositions and an ever-changing BFM
problem.

The nose in lag situation is similar to the 6000 foot setup. If the bandit is
forced to lag due to an inferior turn rate, the contest will be won by the
more maneuverable aircraft. If the attacker has superior turn
performance with excess energy and is driving into your blind area to
make a lag corner, you should turn hard until you can maintain a tally
and extend. If the attacker has a small angular problem, this will be a
short extension followed by another break turn. If the bandit is pointed
well behind you at close range, there is a chance the bandit may overshoot
to the outside of your turn. This transition type maneuver is discussed in
the next section.

AAM-6 D - 26


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_33.jpeg:
Transition From the Defensive

In transition maneuvers, if your defensive plan is executed correctly, you
will be afforded an opportunity to separate or force a flight path overshoot,
giving you the chance to reverse and go offensive.

Overshoots
When presented with an unsolvable angular problem, the attacker will

reposition or overshoot (Figure D-14). There are two types of overshoot
geometry.

AAM-06-14

Figure D - 14. Forcing the Overshoot.

The first is a flight path overshoot where the attacker crosses your “smoke
trail” but remains inside your longitudinal axis. If an adversary does this,
it is essential that you continue to turn in the same direction to reacquire
the tally (see the 6000 foot lag) to prevent offering the bandit a low aspect,
low angle-off shot.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_34.jpeg:
Secondly, there is a longitudinal axis overshoot that will cross the attacker
over to the other side of your aircraft. Your options are now predicated on
three aspects of the overshoot: range, angle-off and closure. The farther
back in range the overshoot occurs, the less likely a role reversal attempt
will succeed. If you cannot reverse and gain the 3/9 line advantage, then
roll to visually acquire the bandit and extend, or turn into the bandit to
force a reposition. The higher the aspect of the attack, the higher the
angle-off will be at the overshoot, the more pronounced the overshoot will
be and the better the likelihood of the defender executing a successful
reversal. The final factor is closure. The more closure the attacker has at
the overshoot, the farther across the longitudinal axis the attacker will go.
The type of overshoot that will allow a role reversal (for similar turning
aircraft) is one where the bandit will come close to your 3/9 line. This
could be anywhere from a high aspect/angle-off co-speed overshoot to a low
aspect/angle-off, high overtake overshoot. The closer the attacker will
pass to your 3/9 line, the less loaded your reversal will have to be to help
the attacker pass your 3/9 line. The farther aft of your 3/9 line the
attacker passes, the more loaded your reversal must be to “help” force the
overshoot.

The key consideration is to confirm the overshoot before executing the
reversal. If in doubt about the reversal, keep the tally and continue
maneuvering in the same direction.

General rules of thumb for reversing are:

e Aspect angle 80-120° (a must, and further predicated by the next
three items)

e Range <3000 feet
e Fast LOS rate

e Low nose rate

AAM-6 D - 28


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_35.jpeg:
Reversals

The next transition maneuver is the reversal (Figure D-15). Not all
overshoots result in a reversal opportunity. If the overshoot occurs at long
range, it should be treated as a 6000 foot nose-in-lag defense. A high
aspect situation enhances the overshoot, but angle-off greater than 90° at
the overshoot results in the bandit ending up aft of your 3/9 line and going
away from you. In this case, a nose-high reversal would leave you slowed
down and probably still defensive.

AAM-06-15

Figure D - 15. Reversal.

If it is not apparent a 3/9 overshoot will occur, you should continue to turn
hard until the overshoot is generated. As the bandit crosses your six,
reduce AOA, roll and reacquire the tally while assessing the bandit’s
potential. If the attacker is well aft of your wing line and remains there,
you should extend. If, however, the attacker is level with you and moving
toward your 3/9 line, set your wings to position your lift vector to the
attacker’s high 6 o'clock and pull to force 3/9 line passage. Your objective
is to stop your lateral movement as quickly as possible. You should not
pull into the bandit’s aircraft, or you will risk flying in front of the bandit’s
nose. This type of reversal can lead to a flat or rolling scissors, if a
definite positional advantage is not gained by the initial pull. If this move
does not gain a shot opportunity, a separation should be initiated by
continuing the pull toward the bandit’s six for HCA, and a nose low
attitude. Unload and roll back to reacquire the tally while extending
away.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_36.jpeg:
If it is apparent the bandit will overshoot, you may initiate a move prior to
the actual overshoot to gain 3/9 line advantage. If there is sufficient
airspeed to allow a high roll rate while maintaining AOA, a high-G rolling
reversal should be executed by continuing to turn into the bandit and
applying a combination of top rudder and aileron. The advantage of this
reversal technique is that it slows your forward velocity and causes
maximum angular problems for the attacker while initiating
counteroffensive maneuvering. The penalty, however, for an incorrect
assessment is much greater if the bandit makes a move to maintain
positional advantage. You will find yourself nose high, low airspeed and
low on energy. If in doubt, you should turn until the bandit overshoots,
unload, roll and assess your opponent’s situation.

Intercockpit Directive Defensive Commentary

These directive calls assume rear cockpit tally and front cockpit no joy.
Effective crew coordination in the air combat arena is essential for
survival. Mission success may be determined by the quickness and
accuracy of recognition, communication, execution, general aircraft control
and situational awareness in firm understanding of these terms.

“Hard Left/Right”

This directs a defensive turn to prevent an attacker from entering the
defender’s vulnerable cone. Usually combines energy conservation with
turn rate of sufficient intensity to create increasing aspect for an attacker
at longer range. Exact intensity of the turn is a function of the defender’s
energy state and bandit position. As a rule of thumb, start with 5-6 Gs
when above corner velocity (not to exceed configuration G limits) or 22-25
units AOA when below corner velocity. (Note: Your turn is working when
you see forward movement on the canopy.) The pilot should ensure
maximum power is selected and expect this call to be followed
immediately by “Tighten Down/Break Left/Right” or “Ease off/Op turn.”

“Roll Left/Right”

This directs the pilot to roll approximately 10-30° to refine lift vector
placement. If the WSO recognizes the lift vector is oriented slightly above
or below the bandit, call “Roll left/right” or “Roll 20° (degrees) left/right” to
set the lift vector on the attacker. This allows you to maximize your turn
and deny turning room available to the bandit.

AAM-6 D - 30


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_37.jpeg:
“Tighten Down”

This tells the pilot that turn intensity is insufficient for the situation. The
pilot should increase G or AOA (or slow down to turn tighter if above
corner velocity).

“Kase Off/Op Turn”

This tells the pilot that the turn intensity is excessive for the situation.
The pilot should decrease G and AOA and maintain max power. Used to
gain energy while the bandit’s nose is not threatening but a full extension
is unwarranted. This maneuver should be flown at 18-22 units AOA.

“Break Left/Right/Up”

This call is used when a missile launch has occurred or is imminent.
Energy conservation is not a factor. Minimum turn radius and maximum
turn rate are required immediately. The conditions are best achieved at
corner velocity. If called well above corner (500 KCAS+), the pilot should
apply max G allowable, modulate power and use speed brake as required
to slow to corner. Approaching corner, the pilot should reapply maximum
power and get the speed brake in. If called below corner, the pilot should
apply maximum power and maximum obtainable AOA consistent with G
limitations. In both cases, this is a single plane maneuver into the
attacker or the launched missile. Chaff and/or flares should also be
employed with a break turn.

“Reverse Left/Right”

This call is used when a bandit overshoot is in progress and you want to
execute a reversal to attempt to stay and fight. Since you need to
decrease the attacker’s nose-tail separation, loaded roll performance needs
to be optimized. The pilot should maintain the G load and reverse nose
high blending aileron and rudder. The intent here is to increase the
intensity of the bandit overshoot by minimizing nose-tail separation. A
likely follow-on call is “set your wings.”


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_38.jpeg:
“Set Your Wings”

This call is used when a bandit overshoot has occurred. The pilot should
immediately unload to roll quickly with aileron at least far enough to
check the bandit position and reaction. This is not a loaded up, high AOA
rolling-type maneuver. After the roll, expect a follow-up call such as
“pull,” “reverse left/right,” or “hard left/right.”

“Pull”

This call will normally follow a “set the wings” call. With the wings set, a
pull toward the pure vertical will slow or stop horizontal movement and
can generate nose-tail separation with subsequent nose position
advantage. The pilot should pull at maximum AOA limit until the
bandit’s AFT motion against the background has slowed or begun to move
forward.

“Jink”

This call is used to direct a guns defense. Guns jinks are applications of
rolls, accelerations/decelerations and turns which move the aircraft (not
just the controls and control surfaces) and prevent the attacker from
achieving a stabilized guns solution. They should be held just long enough
to establish a new flight path (2-8 seconds). This is a multi-plane,
three-dimensional maneuver. Use caution for G overshoots during the
jinkout as you accelerate past corner velocity. One of the most important
ingredients of a successful jinkout is maintaining tally. Always assess the
bandit’s position after each jink to determine if a follow-on jink is
required.

“Extend”

This is used to gain energy or separate. The pilot should select maximum
power and fly 8-10 units at the call. Rolls can be made at 8-10 units to
maintain tally and/or set the lift vector for future maneuvering.

“Check (Degrees) Left/Right”

The call is used to maintain tally on the bandit during an extension. At
the call, the pilot should generate a hard check turn in the direction
called. Expect a series of check turns and extensions if the bandit
pursues.

AAM-6 D - 32


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_39.jpeg:
“Pitchback Left/Right”

This is used to direct a nose high course reversal from high calibrated
airspeed. The intent is to exchange excess airspeed for altitude, thereby
turning more efficiently and exercising energy management. In maximum
power, the pilot should pull nose high at approximately 6 G (not to exceed
configuration G limits) and pull to simultaneously change heading, reduce
airspeed and gain altitude. The maneuver may resemble a Chandelle,
Immelmann or Half-Cuban Eight. Rollout airspeed will vary based on
how the maneuver is accomplished. Generally, it is a good idea to
terminate with a good tactical minimum of 400 KCAS.

“Sliceback Left/Right”

This is used to direct a nose low course reversal from low or medium
airspeed. The intent is to exchange altitude for instantaneous and
sustained maneuvering capability, thereby exchanging energy for turn
performance. The pilot should roll to position the lift vector below the
horizon and pull to simultaneously change heading, while increasing or
maintaining airspeed. May be done at any power or AOA, but generally
maximum power and AOA to maintain 400 KCAS or greater. Depending
on the situation, this call may be followed by “hard left/right,” “ease off’ or
“rollout.”

“Pitch Left/Right to Slice”

This call is used to direct an efficient course reversal from high calibrated
airspeed. The intent is to sacrifice some energy for a quicker turn. The
pilot should simultaneously pitch up at approximately 6-1/2 G (not to
exceed configuration G limits) and retard power. Play the transition to a
sliceback so that the nose passes down through the horizon near corner
velocity. To continue the maneuver, execute a sliceback as desired.

“Floor”

When fighting BFM, the “floor” is obviously the ground. During training,
an artificial floor will be set accordingly. Most often, the floor is set at
5000 feet AGL or the bottom of the airspace, whichever is higher. You
must consider this floor as the ground, and any floor violation will result
in a floor kill. As most BFM engagements slowly work themselves down
to the floor, it is imperative that one understands the floor fight.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)
1. Identify the basic positional and geometric variables associated
with BFM to include life vector, aspect, angle off and pursuit curves

and how they affect a BFM fight.

2. Identify selected defensive BFM maneuvers, their purpose and
when they should be employed.

AAM-6 B-1


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_40.jpeg:
“Floor Transition”

As a general rule, “he/she who gets to the floor with the most energy
wins.” Additionally, as a defender, the floor can be used as a “weapon” for
an unaware bandit. Since the defender will most often arrive at the floor
first, a timely and well-planned floor transition is important. You must
begin to devote some of your attention to the floor when 4000-5000 feet
above it. As a general technique, begin the floor transition when dive
angle equals 10% of your altitude above the floor. Example: begin the
floor transition when 30° nose low at 8000 feet (assuming a 5000-foot
floor). This should result in a controlled transition and a relatively high
energy state.

“Floor Save”

If you failed to recognize the approaching floor, you must devote all of your
attention to your 12 o’clock, since the PK of the ground is much higher
than the bandit at your 6 o'clock. Once recognized, you must set your
wings level to the horizon and abruptly pull the nose above the horizon.
Based on nose position, energy state and altimeter lag, a cross check of
altitude is important to ensure you have not impacted the floor. This
maneuver is not the best BFM in relation to the bandit, so it is imperative
that once you have defeated the floor, you continue defeating the bandit —
NEVER GIVE UP! Since you have momentarily taken your eyes off the
bandit, a good technique is to reestablish the turn in the same direction
while trying to acquire the bandit again. Once “tally,” you must continue
to fight your best 1 v 1 BFM. Regaining energy will be your first task. Op
turn (if able) at 20 CPU and continue to keep your lift vector on the bandit
while cross checking altitude.

‘

‘Floor Fight”

Once at the floor, you must continue to fight BFM, but your BFM will
change slightly. If you have arrived at the floor with a high energy state
(300 KIAS +) and the bandit’s nose is stuck in lag, a well-performed “Op”
turn (20 CPU) should allow you to rate around the circle, thus increasing
angles and range, and eventually getting to an offensive position. If the
bandit has sufficient energy, he/she may attempt to employ ordnance.
Obviously, guns jinks will be limited in direction. Depending on energy
state and the bandits position, a jink up could be used to force the bandit
into an overshoot situation. Another common technique is to reverse your
direction of turn (a flat scissors). To perform this maneuver, unload, roll
in the opposite direction, break (30 CPU), and then reestablish tally and
refine your lift vector while easing off to 20 CPU. This should result in

AAM-6 D - 34


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_41.jpeg:
getting the bandit “out of sync” and again hopefully result in a potential
overshoot situation. Important safety tip: as you reverse your direction,
you are opening up your tail to the bandit and a well-timed flare will
defeat the impending “FOX-II.”

Common DBFM Errors

Common errors during this phase include:

Losing tally
Not maneuvering in relation to the bandit

Not pulling with your lift vector on or slightly below the bandit and
allowing vertical turning room

Extending too long and allowing the bandit to come nose on inside
your vulnerable cone

Poor power control resulting in being too fast with too big a turn
circle, or too slow with no turn rate

Reversing too early, too late or not aggressively enough
Not employing chaff/flares when appropriate
Poorly timed gun jinks

Jinking in plane with the bandit


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_42.jpeg:
CONCLUSION

The purpose of this workbook is to provide a logical approach to surviving
an attack by an adversary. There are very few times you want to get
involved in a BFM situation in an F-15E and you NEVER want to get
yourself into a defensive situation. However, if you have somehow
managed to find yourself in one of these engagements, remember three
basic rules:

1. Basic fighter maneuvers are to be accomplished only if required and
only as much as required. They are corrections for the imperfect
setup or to correct errors made by you or forced by the enemy.

2. Continue to maneuver to deny the opponent a shot opportunity.
Never give up!

3. Ifyou can exploit a bandit’s mistakes and become offensive,
maneuver to remain aft of the bandit’s 3/9 line and in position to
shoot. If a shot is not possible, then separate before becoming
defensive.

AAM-6 D - 36


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_43.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

To determine how hard a turn into an attacker should be, you must
first consider

po op

the attacker’s range and overtake.
your altitude above sea level.

the attackers abilities.

your air-to-air weapons load.

If the bandit correctly maneuvers out-of-plane to preserve nose/tail
separation and control overtake, you should

pe op

turn harder.

extend for energy or attempt a separation.
go idle and boards.

wave a white hankie.

If the bandit overshoots level with your plane of motion (inside 2000
feet), and is moving toward your 3/9 line,

a.

b.

set your wings to position your lift vector at the bandit’s high 6
and pull to force the bandit out in front.

position your lift vector away from the bandit and pull to
increase angle off.

extend for energy while the bandit is out of weapons
parameters.

pull into the vertical to trade airspeed for altitude while the
bandit is overshooting.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_44.jpeg:
l. a
2. b
3. a

AAM-6

ANSWERS


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_45.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The best way to determine if your turn is generating aspect problems for
the bandit is by

the bandit moving forward on your canopy.

the bandit remaining stationary on the canopy.
the bandit moving aft on your canopy.
monitoring the bandit’s overtake.

Boop

From a 9000 foot perch, what would be your initial move when attacked by
a bandit with similar turn and power capabilities?

a. Break
b. Hard
c. Extend

What is a good rule of thumb for when to reverse on a bandit?

a. High aspect, low angle-off, low line of sight, high turn rate
b. Low aspect, high angle-off, low turn rate, low line of sight
c. High aspect, high angle-off, high line of sight, low turn rate

How long should you hold a guns jink?

a 1-2 seconds

b. Just long enough for the aircraft to change flight paths
c 3-4 seconds

d. Until you feel G on the aircraft


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_46.jpeg:
AAM-6

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_47.jpeg:
AOA

BFM

DBFM

Gr

HCA

LOS

OWS

POM

TAS

WEZ

GLOSSARY
Angle of attack
Basic fighter maneuvers
Defensive basic fighter maneuvers
Radial G
Heading crossing angle
Line of sight
Overload warning system
Plane of motion
True airspeed

Weapons employment zone

AAM-6


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_48.jpeg:
AAM-6

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1.

2.

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
end of text quiz.

Read the BFM section of AFTTP 3-3, Vol XVII.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-6

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

In every conflict since WWI, aircraft have been used to destroy other
aircraft. Although aircraft, weapons and arenas have changed, basic
concepts and basic maneuvering have remained the same. With this in
mind, this workbook covers those basic fighter maneuvers (BFM) that
currently apply to the F-15E and the threat we face.

In air-to-air combat, situations may arise where you will be forced into
defending yourself from an attack until you can either maneuver into an
offensive position of advantage or separate from the fight. To accomplish
this task, you will be required to employ BFM. Basic fighter maneuvers
are not exact maneuvers flown to a specific conclusion, but are
combinations of maneuvers that blend together. The exact combination of
maneuvers depends on a continual assessment of the tactical situation.
Factors that you must analyze include the bandit’s energy state, turn
capability, weapons employment zones (WEZs) based on armament, and
the pursuit curves used (which affects aspect, angle off and range). You
must constantly reassess the effectiveness of your maneuvers versus
reactions by the bandit, thus maintaining a continual process of force,
predict, assess and react until you defeat the bandit by either achieving a
tactical separation, or maneuvering into an offensive position and getting
a kill.

BFM MECHANICS AND DEFINITIONS

BFM is defined as the application of aircraft handling skills to recognize
and solve range, closure, aspect and angle off problems in relation to
another aircraft. In other words, it is the blending of roll, turn and
acceleration to deny or obtain a shot on your opposition.

Roll - Roll allows you to position your lift vector, thus determining the
plane of motion in which you turn. Roll also aids you in keeping sight of
the bandit.

e = Lift vector placement is critical to success in defensive BFM (DBFM).
The lift vector can be visualized under high-G as a vertical plane
extending up through the top of the canopy, perpendicular to the
aircraft’s wings.


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_8.jpeg:
e A maximum rate defensive break turn with the lift vector directly on
the bandit generates the most angles and decreases range. This
effectively denies turning room the bandit may otherwise be able to
exploit.

e Since a pilot normally sits at an angle looking backward over his
shoulders during DBFM, a common tendency is to orient the lift
vector either above or below the bandit. Imagining the lift vector
going straight up between the tails of the F-15E may help a pilot
“visualize” proper placement of the lift vector.

Turn - A turn (which is the most fundamental of the basic fighter
maneuvers) allows you to defeat your bandit’s attack/weapons
employment zones. As your instructor will show you, optimum or max
turns can be defined by aircraft angle of attack.

Break turn - A maximum performance (max) turn.
Hard turn - A energy sustaining turn.

Acceleration - Energy is an extremely important commodity during
air-to-air maneuvering. Your aircraft will not do everything you want it to
and maintain a high energy state. Thus, you will often find the need to
preserve or regain energy. To preserve or gain some energy, a well flown
optimum turn (“opt turn”) can be flown in the 18-22 units AOA regime.
The quickest way to regain energy is through a well-executed extension at
8-10 units AOA. Although getting your energy back is your main goal,
keep these factors in mind.

e Be aware of your nose position and do not allow it to get buried.
Giving up your newly gained energy to avoid the floor and/or giving
the bandit vertical turning room to enter a WEZ may be the end
result of a poorly flown acceleration.

e Becognizant of your attitude (do not try to accelerate going up),
altitude (if you hit the ground you have finished the enemy's job) and
airspeed (if you are slow, acceleration will take longer). There is a
constant trade off between energy and nose position when flying
BFM.

e Holding an acceleration too long will give the bandit an angular
advantage and may not be worth the extra airspeed.

AAM-6 D-2


Text from AAM-6_DBFM_page_9.jpeg:
e Best acceleration occurs at MIN DRAG (8-10 AOA) and MAX AB at
speeds between 300-450 KCAS due to thrust/drag balances.

BFM and Aircraft Feel

Successful energy management is often the key element in determining
the outcome of a maneuvering fight. The challenge of energy
management is to know your aircraft’s envelope and to develop a
“heads-up” feel for aircraft performance and energy state since you will be
looking over your shoulder trying to keep a tally on the bandit. AOA
control is essential in performing each of the basic maneuvers. Figure D-1
illustrates some key numbers that provide a reference for “max
performing” the Strike Eagle. A rule of thumb for max performing the
Strike Eagle is to fly at 8/18/28 or 10/20/30 AOA and not in between.

DEPARTURE RESISTANCE
DECREASED
FUEL/STORE ASYMMETRY
LIMIT

AILERON GYROSCOPE
WASHOUT /] EFFECT

BEST
ENDURANCE

TTTTETTT PTT TPT Teeter

14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38
COCKPIT ANGLE OF ATTACK (AOA) UNITS

AAM-06-01

Figure D - 1. BFM AOA Guide.

Geometry

To successfully execute DBFM, you must understand the geometric
relationship between your aircraft and an attacker and how it affects
weapon employment capability. The spatial relationship of two aircraft
can be analyzed from three perspectives: positional geometry, attack
geometry and weapon envelope.


