Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-1
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

JANUARY 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_10.jpeg:
Drag

Drag is the force that resists the movement of an object through the air
mass. Since it must be overcome by thrust, it is generally given a vector
value in the opposite direction of thrust. Total drag on the aircraft comes
from three basic sources (Figure D-3).

Subsonic Drag

Induced Drag

Induced drag is that portion of total drag that comes from the production
of lift. When propelling an airfoil through the air, a split in the air mass
occurs. Because of the shape of the airfoil, the air moving across the top of
the airfoil must travel a farther distance and therefore must move faster
than the air moving across the bottom. This creates a low pressure on top
of the wing and higher pressure underneath it (lift). Naturally, the high
pressure air tries to flow into the area of low pressure wherever it can,
and this occurs at the wing tips and at the trailing edge. This
phenomenon generates a net downwash in the free air stream behind the
wing. There is a physical resistance to the generation of this downwash
that must be overcome and the resistance is called induced drag. Induced
drag is greater at high angles of attack and/or low airspeeds.

WAVE DRAG

AAM-01-03

Figure D - 3. Total Drag.

AAM-1 D-4


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_11.jpeg:
Parasite Drag

Parasite drag is that portion of total drag that is caused by disturbing the
air mass with the profile of the aircraft and everything that is hung on it.
Parasite drag is divided into several subcategories as depicted in Figure
D-8, but does not require detailed study here.

Wave Drag

Wave drag is almost a negligible factor at lower airspeeds, but becomes
such a factor at transonic speeds that it cannot be ignored. It does, in fact,
have a significant influence on the design of the aircraft. At any speed, an
aircraft moving through the air mass creates pressure disturbances that
move away from the aircraft at the speed of sound. This creates an
invisible “bow wave” in front of the aircraft. If this bow wave is made
visible in a wind tunnel with the use of smoke, the air actually begins to
separate well ahead of the approaching aircraft. When entering the
transonic range, portions of the aircraft are supersonic, and the pressure
disturbances at these points cannot be propagated forward because they
run into sonic velocities traveling in the opposite direction. In this case,
the disturbances are propagated perpendicular to the direction of the sonic
flow (sort of “stacked up” right at the point of disturbance).

This instantaneous compression/decompression of air molecules causes an
energy loss that must continuously be made up by the engines. This
energy loss represents a type of drag known as wave drag. The point at
which wave drag becomes a factor is called the drag divergence Mach, and
is illustrated in Figure D-4 where the coefficient of lift (C,,) is being held
constant as airspeed is increased. Note that only a slight increase in
airspeed causes a dramatic rise in wave drag. Also note from the figure
that once supersonic flight is reached, wave drag effect decreases
dramatically.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_12.jpeg:
For an aircraft to operate routinely in the transonic region, such as in this
case, the drag divergence Mach is delayed as much as possible by
sweeping the wing. Since a certain amount of lift is lost by sweeping the
wing (Figure D-4), the F-15E wing is a compromise—being swept at
approximately 45°. In the F-15E, expect significant wave drag at about
0.95 Mach.

Although the aircraft has been designed to minimize the effects of drag,
the aircrew can still change the amount of drag by varying:

e air density (the denser the air around the aircraft, the more drag it
creates),

e true airspeed (the faster the aircraft goes, the more air is
compressed),

e lift coefficient (the more lift is generated, the more induced drag is
created), and

e aircraft configuration (the more stores hung on the aircraft, the
more parasite drag is created).

DRAG DIVERGENCE MACH

STRAIGHT
WING
AIRCRAFT ~~,

SWEPT
WING
AIRCRAFT

AAM-01-04

Figure D - 4. Drag Divergence Mach.

AAM-1 D-6


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_13.jpeg:
Coefficient of Drag—Minimum Drag

The coefficient of drag (C,) (Figure D-5), increases significantly as AOA
increases.

DRAG

MIN DRAG
RANGE
~_—_—_

AOA AAM-01-05

Figure D - 5. C, Curve.

Minimum drag in the F-15E is achieved at 8-10 units AOA. This AOA
also produces the best acceleration. At slower airspeeds, this equals
approximately %4 - %G. In the 400-500 KCAS region, 8-10 units AOA is
approximately 1 G. Above 500 KCAS, 8-10 units AOA actually occurs at
2-3 G! As a rule of thumb for fast acceleration, for airspeeds below 400
KCAS, you should feel light in the seat (4% G) and for airspeeds above 400
KCAS, you should be at about 1 G.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_14.jpeg:
Optimum Turn

For those times when something less than a maximum turn is acceptable
in order to preserve airspeed, the optimum turn is available. The
optimum turn is the best trade-off between turn performance and airspeed
control.

Optimum turn in the F-15E is achieved at 16-22 units AOA. This AOA
gives the maximum turn rate for a particular airspeed without depleting
energy.

Thrust

Thrust is provided by the engines and is the force that propels the aircraft
forward. The net thrust of a aircraft engine depends on the amount of air
and how fast the air is accelerated through the engine. In other words:

T =M (V2- V1)

Where: _ T = thrust; M = air mass; V2 = exit velocity;
Vi = intake velocity

The engine has been designed to maximize these variables through
state-of-the-art technology; but the aircrew still has the capability to
control the mass of air being processed by varying air density (air at sea
level is twice as dense as air at 22,000 feet), true airspeed (the faster the
aircraft goes, the more air is forced into the engine) and throttle setting
(the faster the engine turns, the more air it processes).

AAM-1 D-8


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_15.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Label the four aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft in flight.

<< a ae ad a 1 =P. >

\/ AAM-01-06

Figure D - 6.

The three factors affecting thrust that can be controlled by the
aircrew are ; , and

The four factors affecting drag that can be controlled by the aircrew
are ; ; , and

The three factors affecting lift that can be controlled by the aircrew
are ; , and .

Lift acts perpendicular to the relative wind.

a. True
b. False

Weight always opposes lift.

a. True
b. False

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_16.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. The four aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft in flight are:

LIFT

cS

DRAG

WEIGHT

AAM-01-07

Figure D - 7.

2. air density (altitude), true airspeed and throttle setting.

3. air density (altitude), true airspeed, lift coefficient (angle of attack)
and aircraft configuration.

4. air density, true airspeed and lift coefficient (angle of attack).
5. a

6. b

AAM-1 D-10


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_17.jpeg:
Stability

To better envision the forces and moments acting upon an aircraft, the
reference shows three mutually perpendicular reference axes all
intersecting at the center of gravity. These axes are shown in Figure D-8
below.

LONGITUDINAL
AXIS

VERTICAL
AXIS r

Z AAM-01-08

Figure D - 8.

The aerodynamic forces just studied are all focused along the longitudinal
axis, so take an independent look at that axis.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_18.jpeg:
Generally, the longitudinal axis is extended through the fuselage
reference line (FRL) as shown in Figure D-9. For purposes of simplicity,
suppose that thrust and drag act through the longitudinal axis and
balance each other in static flight conditions.

LIFT

WEIGHT

AAM-01-09

Figure D - 9. Force Axes.

In Figure D-9, note the aerodynamic center (AC). This is the point on the
aircraft where all changes in lift occur. Its position remains relatively
constant, regardless of the angle-of-attack. The other significant point in
Figure D-9 is the center of gravity (CG), which is the point about which all
changes of weight occur. To further simplify this discussion, locate the AC
and CG along the fuselage reference line (FRL). Note that the AC is
located aft of the CG. The significance of this will become clear in the
discussion of longitudinal stability.

AAM-1 D-12


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_19.jpeg:
Longitudinal Stability refers to the behavior of the aircraft in pitch. If the
aircraft is trimmed for level flight, and then is disturbed in pitch and
tends to return to the trimmed angle-of-attack, it is said to be statically
stable in pitch. Without computerized flight controls, it is important to
have the aircraft stable in pitch so that the pilot is not constantly fighting
to maintain control. Longitudinal stability is primarily dependent upon
the relative location of the aerodynamic center and the center of gravity.
The symmetrical airfoil section shown in Figure D-10 shows two possible
locations of CG and AC.

<a eh

STABLE UNSTABLE
UPGUST UPGUST

(A) (B)

AAM-01-10

Figure D - 10. CG and AC Location.

If the wing in Figure D-10 (A) experiences an upgust, the lift vector is
increased due to the change in angle-of-attack. The increase in lift causes
the wing to rotate nose down around the CG, thereby reducing the
angle-of-attack and restoring the value of lift to its original condition.
This wing has positive longitudinal stability. If the wing in Figure D-10
(B) experiences an upgust, the lift vector is again increased, but the wing
rotates nose up around the CG, thereby increasing the angle-of-attack
even more causing the nose to pitch up further. This is an unstable
condition. Note from the illustration that the CG must be ahead of the AC
to have positive longitudinal stability. In fact, the further ahead the CG
is, the more stable the aircraft is. Conversely, the closer together the CG
and AC, the more sensitive the aircraft is in pitch (less stable/more
maneuverable).


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-1, March, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected

_ -


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_20.jpeg:
Although the wing in Figure D-10 (A) has positive longitudinal stability, it
is not in equilibrium—that is, the forces are not balanced. A lifting force
aft of the CG pitches the wing (and consequently the aircraft) nose down.
To counter this obviously undesirable characteristic, an offsetting and
equal nose up force must be created. This may be done through use of a
canard or a horizontal tail. In the case of the F-15E, a horizontal
stabilator has been utilized. In order for the stabilator to provide a nose
up moment, it must be made to create downward or negative lift (Figure
D-11).

LIFT
(WING)

DRAG THRUST
e = Pr a 5
AC

LIFT WEIGHT

(TAIL)

AAM-01-11

Figure D - 11. Longitudinal Stability.

AAM-1 D-14


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_21.jpeg:
Again, the relative locations of AC and CG determine the longitudinal
stability of the aircraft. The CG, however, is constantly on the move as a
result of ordnance being expended/jettisoned and/or fuel being consumed
or dumped. That movement, as illustrated in Figure D-12, directly affects
handling characteristics of the aircraft.

AAM-01-12

Figure D - 12. CG Movement.

The burn off of fuel in the F-15E does not affect CG as much as in some
aircraft. The CG is slightly forward when full (slightly more stable) and
moves slightly aft as internal fuel is burned (slightly less stable).
However, CFT's and any stores loaded aft of the CG have a greater
destabilizing effect on the aircraft in pitch. This destabilizing effect is
most critical at higher angles-of-attack with centerline stores on board
because turbulent air created by the stores tends to wash out stabilator
authority. Change in pitch sensitivity is not normally noticeable by the
aircrew due to effects of the pitch trim compensator; however, in the event
of loss of CAS, these changes are definitely noticeable. Hung
air-to-ground stores on the aft CFT stations may put the CG behind the
aft limit. The CAS masks adverse effects, but with failed pitch CAS, the
pilot may have to jettison wing stores to regain satisfactory longitudinal
stability.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_22.jpeg:
Supersonic flight moves the AC aft approximately 25% of the mean
aerodynamic chord from its subsonic position (Figure D-13).

WEIGHT

AAM-01-13

Figure D - 13. AC Shift.

This has the same effect as moving the CG forward in that it decreases
the authority of the stabilator and makes the aircraft more stable. In this
condition, the stick can actually be pulled completely aft without fear of an
aircraft over G. In some aircraft, there is a significant “transonic dig in,”
which occurs when the AC shifts forward as the aircraft decelerates from
supersonic to subsonic and the aircraft is under more than one positive G.
This phenomenon and “Mach tuck,” which occurs when crossing Mach 1.0
accelerating, are both unnoticeable in the F-15E because the flight control
system (FCS) completely masks them. However, if the FCS is not working
properly, both are there to be reckoned with. Transonic dig can cause an
over G with the pitch CAS OFF and pitch ratio EMERG.

Lateral Stability refers to the behavior of the aircraft in roll, and is
primarily dependent on the geometry of the wing. The F-15E is designed
to exhibit only slightly positive lateral stability characteristics in order to
produce rapid roll rates when desired. The CAS eliminates most of the
adverse characteristics of near neutral stability in roll, yet allows
exceptional control capability. During routine operations, the only
changes experienced in lateral stability are due to external stores hung
under the aircraft. Symmetrical external stores have a tendency to
increase lateral stability because they represent extra surface area that
must be moved against the airstream during a roll. They also require a
greater force in overcoming inertia to start a roll. Exceptions are
LANTIRN pods and the centerline tank which reduce lateral stability.

AAM-1 D-16


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_23.jpeg:
Directional Stability refers to the behavior of the aircraft in yaw, and is
primarily influenced by the surface of the vertical tails. The F-15E
exhibits positive directional characteristics in yaw, with or without CAS
being operational. Once again, during routine operations, the only thing
that changes directional stability is external stores. Generally speaking,
external stores have a destabilizing effect on directional
stability—especially those which are hung forward of the center of gravity
(i.e., LANTIRN pods). When the aircraft is yawed, either due to gust
factor or rudder input, the increased surface area of the external stores
catches more of the relative wind and aggravates the yawing motion.

Stability, then, affects capability to control the aerodynamic forces acting

on the aircraft in flight and, subsequently, the ability to move the aircraft.

The F-15E, while designed to exhibit positive stability characteristics in
all three axes, is not so stable that it cannot produce rapid roll and
G-onset rates. This is an important factor when maneuvering in the
air-to-air environment.

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_24.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. External stores generally tend to roll, and
the aircraft in pitch and yaw.

destabilize/stabilize
stabilize/destabilize
destabilize/destabilize
stabilize/stabilize

po op

2. Longitudinal stability is dependent upon the relationship between

wing chord and lift vector.

true airspeed and C,.

aerodynamic center and center of gravity.
pilot and WSO.

po op

AAM-1 D-18


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_25.jpeg:
ANSWERS

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_26.jpeg:
TURN PERFORMANCE
Definitions

Instantaneous Corner Velocity

The minimum velocity at which maximum G can be obtained is defined as
instantaneous corner velocity. Below this speed, buffet or stall are
encountered; above this speed, the structural limit is encountered first.

Sustained Corner Velocity

Sustained corner velocity is the speed at which a maximum, sustained
rate of turn can be achieved for a given power setting. It is a function of
thrust, since it occurs where G is at maximum attainable without an
accompanying loss of speed and/or altitude.

Sustained Turn

Sustained turn refers to the sustained rate and radius of a turn for a given
power setting, without an accompanying loss of speed and/or altitude.

Structural Limits

Structural limits refers to the maximum airspeed or G beyond which
structural damage occurs. Maximum G determines the upper limits of an
aircraft's envelope. Total dynamic air pressure, or max Q, defines the
right hand boundary to the envelope.

Limits to Turn Performance

Although there may be many variables which determine the outcome of a
particular air-to-air engagement such as surprise, aircrew proficiency,
type of weapons, etc.; the turn performance of the aircraft involved may
play a major role in the outcome of a turning engagement. The F-15E,
although designed for the deep interdiction role, boasts exceptionally fine
turning performance. The turning ability of any aircraft, however, is
limited by several factors.

AAM-1 D - 20


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_27.jpeg:
Amount of Lift Obtainable

Generally speaking, the more lift that is generated on a particular
airframe, the better it turns. As noted earlier in this workbook, the
amount of lift generated with a given wing area is directly controllable by
the pilot. Therefore, by varying density altitude, true airspeed and
angle-of-attack (C,,), the pilot is varying the turn performance of his
aircraft. In Figure D-14 below, a C,max curve is plotted against airspeed
and G to give a good depiction of how lift affects turn performance. Flight
in the area left/above the C,max curve is not possible because boundary
layer separation occurs, lift is reduced, and this automatically results in a
decreased load factor.

LOAD FACTOR (G)
o

MACH NUMBER —————>

AAM-01-14

Figure D - 14. C,max versus Airspeed/G.

Note that density altitude is not included as a variable on the chart. This
means that the chart is only good for the particular altitude at which it
was figured.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_28.jpeg:
Amount of G Permissible

This limit to turn performance is the maximum G the aircraft is designed
to withstand. It may also be a lesser limit imposed by higher
headquarters or wing/squadron authorities to help the aircraft last longer.
In the latter case, the pilot does not receive a caution through the OWS
that the aircraft is approaching this limit. The G limit may also be plotted
on the same type graph that is used for lift obtainable (see Figure D-15).
Notice that a maximum of 9 Gs is not allowable at higher airspeeds due to
rapidly increasing pressure loads at the higher Mach numbers. OWS
figures this decreasing G limit value for the pilot and continues to give
accurate warnings of an impending or actual over G.

NOTE

Data varies according to specific altitude, gross weight and stores

configuration.

De Ree anne Seen aan ee See See See ee
8 bese ee bee lee ee bee eee ele ee bees Neue eee ete eee deel eee eee
=
o
| eee eee eee eee ee enone See ee ee nee ee ee eee ee ee ee
ke
Cl presen pee tee se eee pe eee etree pee eg ee peepee Eee pee eee ee pees peceee
LL
Q 4 l-----i-----4-----40-----t---- 2d eek deb ed eee
_

MACH NUMBER ————=>

AAM-01-15

Figure D- 15. G Limit.

AAM-1 D - 22


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_29.jpeg:
Amount of Thrust Available

This limit to turn performance may affect you in one of several ways.
First, it determines the amount of G sustainable at current flight
conditions. Producing G means producing lift, and producing lift means
producing induced drag that must, in turn, be overcome with thrust.
Since the amount of thrust available in the F-15E, although significant, is
still finite, the aircraft can only pull a finite amount of G before losing
airspeed. Secondly, thrust available determines maximum speed, given
current flight conditions. This limit can also be depicted on the same type
of graph used to plot G allowable and C,max limits to turn performance
(Figure D-16). Note that in some conditions our maximum speed may
actually be an aircraft limit rather than a thrust limit, in which case max
speed would remain fixed as depicted on the graph and excess thrust could
only be used to climb or turn. Although airspeed limit (allowable and/or
attainable) is influenced by stores, it is disregarded for this example.

NOTE: At Low | ALTITUDES THIS MAY

LOAD FACTOR (G)

MACH NUMBER —————>

AAM-01-16

Figure D - 16. Thrust Limit.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

l "i
AS I O
= |
=: a — @ i \ a O
f = Ss y
7 K . x oo 0 Aa i}
_ HS [> Is d

a

|

——

= =
Z

COVER

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION
This workbook is your guide in studying the basic aerial attack concepts

and those factors affecting aircraft performance. It provides knowledge
needed to effectively operate the F-15E aircraft in a combat environment.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.00... eeecceeeeseecesneecesneeecesaeesessaeeseseeeseeaeeseeeeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)........... cece B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. ee eeeeeees C-1
TEXT oo eecscecceeesseeeccessseeeceesssseeesessssaeeeceessaeeecceesaeeeseessaeeesenegaas D-1
END OF PET QUIZ: cers ans canis saws seen ous sans axis cone uate sass aus ais ease aes canis aes ance ae E-1
GLOSSARY 00 eeeceeeeneecesseeecnsaeecessaeecesaeeeessaeesesaeesesaeesessaeesesaaeeensas F-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_30.jpeg:
If the three limits to turn performance are all plotted on the same graph
(Figure D-17), the depicted flight “envelope” represents the performance to
be expected from the aircraft in a given set of flight conditions. Ifa
number of these charts are used with different sets of flight conditions, a
better understanding occurs of how the aircraft’s turning performance is
improved or degraded. Also, there is a basis for comparing two different
aircraft in otherwise identical flight conditions.

10

LOAD FACTOR (G)
a

MACH NUMBER [&———>>

AAM-01-17

Figure D - 17. Performance Envelope.

Turn Performance Measurements

While the performance envelope in Figure D-17 gives some good cockpit
indicators of what to expect from the aircraft, it does little to show how
well the aircraft is actually turning. Turn performance can be measured
in two different ways. First, the rate at which the aircraft is turning—that
is, how quickly the aircraft is getting around the circle. Secondly, the
radius of the circle the aircraft is turning. Let us examine each of these
measurements separately.

AAM-1 D - 24


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_31.jpeg:
Turn Rate

Turn rate is measured in degrees per second-the higher the turn rate, the
better the turn. It can be derived from the following formula:

Gr xgxK
oOo = ——
V
where:
@ = turn rate (deg/sec)
Gr =radialG
g = gravity constant (32.2 ft/sec’)
K = conversion constant for radians to degrees
(57.3 deg/rad)

V_ =aircraft velocity (ft/sec)

Since the formula contains two constants and only two variables, throw
out the constants and say that:

Turn rate is solely dependent on true airspeed and radial G. Nothing else
enters into the equation. The important relationship to glean from this
formula is that if airspeed is held constant and radial G is increased, turn
rate is increased (better turn). Conversely, if radial G is held constant and
airspeed is increased, turn rate is decreased (worse turn).


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_32.jpeg:
Turn Radius

Turn radius is measured in feet—the smaller the radius the better the
turn. It can be derived from the following formula:

Vr
R = ———
g xX Gr

where:
R_- = turn radius (feet)
V_ =aircraft velocity (ft/sec)
g = gravity constant (32.2 ft/sec’)
Gr =radialG

Once again throw out the constant and say that:

Ve
R= ——
Gr

Understand that the two variables that determine turn rate (true airspeed
and radial G) are also the same two variables that determine turn
radius—and in the same manner. Holding airspeed constant and
increasing radial G results in a smaller turn radius (better turn) and a
higher turn rate (also better turn), whereas holding radial G constant and
increasing airspeed results in a larger turn radius (worse turn) and lower
turn rate (also worse turn).

What was just learned, in addition to the two variables that determine
turn rate/radius, is that any two aircraft have exactly the same turn
performance if they are at the same airspeed and radial G. At 350 knots
and 2 Gs, a Boeing 747 and an F-15E have exactly the same turn rate and
radius. Likewise, at 60 knots and 2 Gs a Piper Cub and an F-15E have
the same turn rate/radius. Unfortunately, at 60 knots, the F-15E is not
capable of pulling 1 G, much less 2 Gs. But the Piper Cub can easily pull
2 Gs at 60 knots, and therein lies the difference in turn
performance—amount of G available at a given airspeed.

AAM-1 D - 26


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_33.jpeg:
Radial G and the “Egg”

Given the fact that lift and weight do not always directly oppose each
other, how do these forces interact if the aircraft is in other than straight
and level flight?

If an aircraft is banked and G is not increased, the aircraft cannot
maintain level flight. Figure D-18 shows why this occurs. Note that
weight and lift vectors have remained constant, but because lift always
acts in the plane of symmetry, and weight always acts toward the center
of earth, the lift vector has been effectively divided into vertical and
horizontal components. The portion of the lift vector opposing weight is
now less than the weight component, so the aircraft descends.

WINGS LEVEL 60° BAN INVERTED

L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1

0.87

7
Pe

o
-
2
°
-
eo
-
o
-
-*
°

AAM-01-18

Figure D - 18. Radial G.

The horizontal portion of the lift vector is an unbalanced force and causes
the aircraft to move in that direction. The aircraft continues to accelerate
toward this “centripetal force” until it is matched by a balancing
“centrifugal force” and equilibrium is re-established. The acceleration
toward the center of rotation is known as radial acceleration or radial G.

Note also in the figure above, that when the aircraft is totally inverted
and still maintaining one positive G, the lift and weight vectors are in
consonance and are added together.

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_34.jpeg:
Therefore, depending on the placement of lift vector, gravity may be
helping or hurting turn performance. In Figure D-19, the G felt on your
body and read on the cockpit G meter is labeled Gr or total G and is the
value of the lift vector in the plane of symmetry. The value of radial G
(Gr) is the measure of turn performance and is a summation of the values
of total G and weight (W).

PLANE OF TURN

AAM-01-19

Figure D- 19. Radial G.

Anytime lift vector is pointed above the horizon, gravity is reducing radial
G/turning performance; anytime the lift vector is pointed below the
horizon, gravity is increasing radial G/turning performance (Figure D-19).
This is true regardless of whether the aircraft is turning in the horizontal
or in the pure vertical.

AAM-1 D - 28


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_35.jpeg:
To demonstrate this, Figure D-20 shows an aircraft performing a constant
airspeed, constant 4-G loop. Notice that instead of being a perfect circle,
the effect of radial G produces an egg-shaped maneuver. In actual flight,
the aircraft would tend to decelerate during the climb (thrust minus
gravity) and accelerate during the dive (thrust plus gravity) which would
accentuate the egg-shape of the maneuver even more. Try to visualize
this egg-shape in three-dimensional form. This “tactical egg” is referred to
throughout the air-to-air phase of academic and flight instruction.

OC Gr = 4.7

AAM-01-20

Figure D - 20. Effects of Radial G on Constant Airspeed.

Most new fighter aircrews who have trouble in the air-to-air phase do so
because they do not understand the concept of radial G and how it affects
turning performance. Being born and raised in a flat, three-dimensional
world often makes maneuvering in the vertical or oblique a difficult and
foreign concept. However, a total understanding of radial G is essential to
successful aerial combat.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_36.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Inthe figures below, label the lift/weight relationship.

WINGS LEVEL 60° BANK INVERTED
L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1

AAM-01-21

Figure D - 21.

2. Turning the aircraft with the lift vector below the horizon
the turn radius.

a. does not affect
b. increases
c. decreases

3. The three limits turn performance are

lift limit, gross weight limit and drag limit.
thrust limit, gross weight limit and G limit.
thrust limit, drag limit and lift limit.

lift limit, G limit and thrust limit.

pe op

AAM-1 D - 30


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_37.jpeg:
When the turn performance limits are plotted against true airspeed
(or Mach number) and G, the resulting flight envelope is good at only
one altitude and configuration.

a. True
b. false

The two measurements of turn performance are
and

Rate of turn is dependent upon

altitude and gross weight.

true airspeed and radial G.
thrust available and altitude.
gross weight and true airspeed.

pe op

Maintaining a constant radial G while decreasing true airspeed has
what kind of effect on turn rate?

a. It increases turn rate.

b. It decreases turn rate.

c. The effect depends on altitude.

d. The effect depends on gross weight.

Turn radius is dependent upon and

Any two aircraft with the same true airspeed and radial G have
turn radii.

a. equal
b. different

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_38.jpeg:
ANSWERS

WINGS LEVEL 60° BANK INVERTED
L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1 L=1 W=1
R eS 7
1 Pot
T fo os7
W "
=
V V
in
4
V

AAM-01-22

Figure D - 22.

d

a

turn rate, turn radius
b

a

true airspeed, radial G

a


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_39.jpeg:
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Now that there are means to measure the effectiveness of the turn, as well
as the limits of performance, some numbers are rearranged on a graph. In
Figure D-23, turn rate is plotted along the vertical axis instead of G, and a
plot of turn radii is superimposed.

20
et
2 e/a Ae
aaa ee/ ee ASeeeee
af Ae

ee ee

TURN RATE

MACH NUMBER ————>

AAM-01-23

Figure D - 23. Turn Measurements.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft in flight and
indicate how they may be used most effectively in a maneuvering
environment.

2. Identify the limitations and measurements of turn performance.

3. Identify the terms corner velocity and sustained corner velocity.

4. Given flight parameters and an energy maneuverability chart,

determine aircraft performance capabilities.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1 Section V Airspeed Limitations, Prohibited
Maneuvers, CG Limitations,
Acceleration Limitations, External
Stores Limitations

Section VI Handling Qualities, Stalls, Flight

With Asymmetric Loads,
Departures, Autorolls, Slow Speed
Flight

AFTTP 3-3 Chapter 4 Aircraft Handling Characteristics

AAM-1 B-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_40.jpeg:
In Figure D-24, the flight envelope is superimposed over the turn
measurements graph to give a very useful performance management tool
(the C, curve has been replotted to reflect turn rate instead of G). Now it
is possible to see how effective a turn the aircraft is capable of at any point
throughout the flight envelope. Again, this chart is only applicable at a
given altitude, gross weight and stores configuration.

20
18
16
14
12

10

TURN RATE

MACH NUMBER ————;>

AAM-01-24

Figure D - 24. Performance Management Chart.

AAM-1 D - 34


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_41.jpeg:
The point at which the highest turn rate occurs with the smallest turn
radius (best turn) is in the upper left corner of the chart where the max
allowable G can be obtained with the least amount of airspeed (see
Figure D-25). Due to its position on the chart, the airspeed that produces
the best turn is called “corner velocity.”

HIGHEST TURN RATE
LOWEST TURN RADIUS

TURN RATE

MAC

H NUMBER ————>>

AAM-01-25

Figure D - 25. Corner Velocity.

What this means is that if the aircraft is at corner velocity, with the
configuration and altitude given in the chart, the pilot can pull full aft stick
without fear of an aircraft over G. Note that if airspeed is greater than
corner velocity, G must remain constant, which results in a degraded turn
performance. Conversely, if airspeed is decreased below corner velocity,
maximum G can no longer be obtained and turn performance is again
degraded. The plot for corner velocity assumes full AB and a horizontal
turn.

Another way to state this relationship is-when airspeed is increased past
corner velocity, G must be increased to maintain the same turn rate and
radius. Since there is no more G available, turn radius increases and turn
rate decreases. When airspeed is decreased below corner velocity there is
less G available so turn radius increases, but not as rapidly, and turn rate
decreases more dramatically. There is a tactical time and place to use both
principles.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_42.jpeg:
In most instances, you could expect to lose airspeed when performing this
type of turn, which means quickly moving to another point on the
chart-either to less G while maintaining C,max or to an accelerated stall.
Therefore, usually consider a corner velocity turn as being an
instantaneous turn, in that it is only available for an instant of time
before starting to decrease turn rate and/or increase turn radius.
However, a compromise occurs from corner velocity toward a sustainable
maneuvering condition at less G, while maintaining a C, that does not
approach a stall.

To maintain the best possible turn for an indefinite period of time, move
down and right on the chart, increasing airspeed, until finding the
maximum amount of G sustainable with full A/B and a level/horizontal
turn. Figure D-26 shows that sustained corner velocity occurs at the
lowest speed at which the maximum sustainable G can be achieved—not to
exceed the aircraft G limit. How to compute this point is covered later in
this workbook. Note that unless corner velocity and sustained corner
velocity are coincident (this happens sometimes at low altitudes and low
drag indexes), sustained corner velocity usually results in a lesser turn
rate and greater turn radius. The advantage, however, is that it is
possible to continue turning at sustained parameters to gain the
advantage to kill the bandit.

BEST SUSTAINABLE
TURN/RATE RADIUS

TURN RATE

MACH NUMBER —————>

AAM-01-26

Figure D - 26. Sustained Corner Velocity.

AAM-1 D - 36


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_43.jpeg:
Earlier in this workbook, we learned that it is possible to optimize radial
G by aligning the aircraft’s lift and weight vectors. The absolute tightest
turn made at any given altitude and configuration is available when
purely inverted (top of the egg) at corner velocity. This becomes even
more advantageous when considering that during the turn the thrust
vector is in consonance with gravity allowing the turn to be sustained
longer. In the same vein, the worst corner velocity turn made is a vertical
pull at the bottom of the egg. Not only is the lift vector directly opposed by
gravity, but as the turn is continued, the thrust vector is opposed by
gravity causing an inability to sustain the turn for even a short period of
time. Therefore, the best compromise between a corner velocity turn and
a sustained turn is made by slicing diagonally through the egg in an
oblique loop (see Figure D-27). The tactical situation dictates when God’s
G is used to an advantage, and when gravity is desired against or neutral
to the aircraft.

AAM-01-27

Figure D - 27. Maneuvering in the Tactical Egg.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_44.jpeg:
It is not always practical or logical to fly around at corner velocity, and the
time may arise when the best rate and radius of turn in a gun/missile
break is needed and the aircraft is not at corner velocity—what then? If
above corner velocity, immediately begin the turn at max G (careful, an
over G can easily occur here) and get back down to corner velocity as
quickly as possible. This can be done by selecting idle thrust and
extending the speedbrake while maintaining max G (up to about 500
KCAS). Just before reaching corner velocity, retract the speedbrake and
select full A/B. With a little practice, these actions can be timed so that
full A/B is reached just as corner velocity is reached.

If in the high speed arena where the speedbrake is not effective, the best
way to reach corner velocity is to slow with AOA/G and power modulation.
There are two cautions: (1) the speedbrake is designed to retract
automatically above 25 units AOA and, if the switch is left OUT, extend
again when the AOA drops below 25 units; (2) the speedbrake extension
telegraphs exactly what the pilot is doing to the adversary.

AAM-1 D - 38


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_45.jpeg:
On the other hand, the aircraft may be below corner velocity when the
quickest, tightest turn is needed. In this case, immediately select full A/B
and turn at C,;max. Use some finesse in this regime because C,;max can
be exceeded and turn performance degraded. Airspeed may or may not be
maintained during the turn, but there probably is no choice in the matter.
Continue turning at C,;max (use approximately 30 units AOA) until the
tactical situation allows the turn to be relaxed. At that point, leave the
throttles in full A/B and unload the aircraft to minimum drag (Cymin)
AOA. In the F-15E, minimum Cymax approximated at 8-10 units AOA as
indicated in Figure D-28, or just slightly less than 1 G (a light-in-the-seat
feeling, but not a negative G feeling). If supersonic, 8-10 units AOA occurs
with between 1 and 2 Gs on the aircraft until back in the subsonic range.
At times when the quickest, tightest turn is not required, the best trade-
off between turn performance and airspeed control is the optimum turn,
and it is always performed at 16-22 units AOA in the F-15E (a light buffet
on the wings).

AOA

AAM-01-28

Figure D - 28. Min Drag/Optimum Turn AOA.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_46.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The minimum airspeed at which maximum G can be obtained is
called

po op

stall speed.

best C,;, over Cp speed.
optimum velocity.
corner velocity.

2. The very best sustainable turn rate and radius for a given altitude
and configuration occurs (at)

po op

20 minutes after T.O.
optimum turn airspeed.
sustained corner velocity.
16-22 units AOA.

3. You are flying at corner velocity and wish to turn at your best
rate/radius, but also to sustain the turn for at least 360°. Your best

bet is to
a. perform a level turn maintaining 30 units AOA.
b. perform a loop while maintaining 30 units AOA.
c. roll to 185° of bank and perform an oblique loop while
maintaining approximately 30 units AOA.
d. the F-15E has so much power it does not matter.
AAM-1 D - 40


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_47.jpeg:
You are flying at an airspeed below corner velocity and detect an
enemy aircraft at your 6 o'clock closing to weapons parameters. You
should

a. unload to 8-10 units AOA while selecting full A/B.

b. — select full A/B and turn at approximately 30 units AOA until

you have a chance to accelerate.

select full A/B and pull straight up.

d. _ select idle and speedbrake and hope he blows by you so fast he
will not have time to take a shot.

gS

A turn that provides the best trade-off between turn performance and

airspeed control is called and is performed at
units AOA.

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_48.jpeg:
1. d
2. ¢
3. Cc
4. b

5. optimum turn, 16-22

AAM-1

ANSWERS


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_49.jpeg:
ENERGY MANEUVERABILITY
Introduction

Victory in aerial combat usually goes to the aviator who flies and fights
smart. Top aviators throughout history have been able to emphasize their
relative strengths while exploiting the enemy’s relative weaknesses.
Although strengths and weaknesses may lie in any number of areas such
as training, tactics, weapons, etc., it is a basic premise that an aircraft's
maneuverability is the foundation upon which these other areas are built.
The development of the all-aspect missile is, in fact, an attempt to
neutralize the differences in dissimilar aircraft maneuverability.

However, it is a gross misconception to think that the turning dogfight has
gone the way of the biplane. Every conflict, since the invention of the
aircraft, in which enemy aircraft have engaged, has resulted in some sort
of close-in turning engagement. The key to winning those engagements
was, and is, energy management.

Traditionally, aviators have recognized the importance of energy by
attempting to always enter a fight with more altitude and airspeed than
their opponents. They noted that, when equally proficient crews in
identical aircraft begin to hassle, the one who enters the fight from a
higher altitude and/or airspeed usually wins. Thus, early studies of
energy were largely the result of trial and error in engagements. Slowly,
a number of specific data points were gathered as a means of comparing
aircraft performance. Among these were maximum airspeed and G, stall
airspeed, combat/service ceilings, and, most notably, wing loading and
thrust-to-weight ratio.

Wing Loading

Wing loading is obtained by dividing the aircraft weight by the surface
area of the wing LOAD- wis. . The assumption is that this allows a
comparison as to how much lift the aircraft generates for turn
performance, i.e., the lower the wing loading, the better the turn
performance. It is good for only one instant of time since no allowance can
be made for airspeed lost during the turn. Also, while it provides an
approximate comparison, it assumes that C, of the wings being compared
is identical or very similar, and that thrust for sustaining the turn is
identical or very similar. While the first assumption can be taken with a
grain of salt when comparing like generations of fighter aircraft, the
second assumption is usually grossly inaccurate. Wing loading then is not
able to stand by itself as a means of comparison.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the End of
Text Quiz.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_50.jpeg:
Thrust-to-Weight Ratio

The thrust-to-weight ratio was used as a means to overcome the
deficiencies inherent in using wing loading as a single means of comparing
dissimilar aircraft. It was simply the aircraft's maximum thrust divided
by its gross weight and expressed as a ratio. It allowed a snapshot look at
how much thrust an aircraft could produce for acceleration or climb
performance. When used with a wing loading comparison, one could get
an approximate feel for which may be the more maneuverable aircraft.
However, even when combined, these methods of comparison did not
provide the aviator with the knowledge of what part of the performance
envelope to utilize to take best advantage of the aircraft’s capabilities, nor
did it tell him what the results of performing in a specific regime would be
over a period of time.

Specific Power (P,)

The theory of specific power was proven with the proliferation of high
performance fighters in the late 1950s. It can be derived for a given
aircraft by the formula Ps; = (V/g) (dV/dt) + dH/dt.

Because power controls true airspeed and energy (which equates to the
capability to climb, increase turn rate, decrease turn radius and
accelerate/decelerate), it is the key to management of energy
maneuverability. It is one of the better ways, but certainly not an
absolute best way, to measure an aircraft's ability to change its total
energy state versus that of another aircraft under the same set of
circumstances.

V dV dH
s= Tt
G dt dt
where:
Vv = aircraft velocity (TAS in ft/sec)
g = gravity constant (32 ft/sec’)
dV/dt = aircraft acceleration (ft/sec’)
dH/dt = aircraft rate of climb/descent (ft/sec)

A positive value for Ps indicates that the aircrew can either climb,
accelerate, increase G or any combination of the three and not sacrifice
one of the other variables.

AAM-1 D - 44


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_51.jpeg:
A negative value for P, indicates that the aircraft cannot sustain its
current flight parameters. The aircrew must descend, decelerate, reduce
G, increase thrust or a combination of the four by some amount.

A zero value for Ps; indicates that the aircraft is in a flight condition where
all variables are balanced and no change in energy state is required to
sustain flight parameters. However, to climb, accelerate or increase G,
one or more of the other remaining flight parameters must be sacrificed.

Energy Maneuverability (EM) Diagram

Using a computer, a multitude of values for Ps; can be figured for the flight
conditions listed on any given performance management chart.
Connecting equal values of Ps yields constant P, contour lines as shown in
Figure D-29. When this is done, the graph is called an “Energy
Maneuverability Diagram.” Note that load factor lines have also been
added. EM diagrams represent performance capability of an aircraft for a
given set of conditions (altitude, gross weight, configuration and power
setting).

TURN RATE

MACH NUMBER —————>

AAM-01-29

Figure D - 29. Energy Maneuverability Diagram.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_52.jpeg:
In addition to corner velocity, which is still evident as the peak of the
performance envelope (A), a number of other interesting points or regions
in the performance envelope now become evident.

Sustainable Envelope

The sustained envelope which was discussed earlier is now very evident
since it is outlined by the P, = 0 contour line. Note that sustained corner
velocity is the point where the zero Ps contour first intersects the max G
line (B). At higher altitudes/heavier gross weights, the zero Ps curve does
not reach the G limit line. In that case, sustained corner velocity would be
found at the point where the Ps; = 0 curve peaks out.

Best Energy Rate at Max G

At some point along the max G line, find a contour line which is tangent to
the max G line (interpolate if necessary). Although this occurs at a higher
Mach and lower turn rate than corner velocity, it produces the best energy
rate for maneuvers at maximum G. In other words, it is possible to climb
while turning at max G, if at the Mach indicated at point (C), and
continue to fly the Mach indicated at the same given point for succeeding
charts for different altitudes.

Comparing Ps

The EM diagram, like other methods of aircraft comparison, does have its
faults. Each diagram is applicable to only one altitude, configuration,
weight and power setting, and the diagram is only capable of considering
horizontal turns. In spite of that, comparing energy maneuverability
diagrams for aircraft in comparable combat configurations provides the
most usable and realistic method of aircraft comparison there is today.
Chart comparison should be used as a tool in training to fight against
dissimilar aircraft. “Knowing the nums,” of course, is not a panacea. The
old adage that Ps never killed anybody is undoubtedly true. However, the
aviator who arms himself with a comprehensive knowledge of the concepts
of energy maneuverability, becomes thoroughly proficient in the
performance of his aircraft, and knows something about the performance
of the adversary, has a much greater likelihood of finding himself in a
position to deliver ordnance rather than receive it!

AAM-1 D - 46


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_53.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The basic aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft in flight are

air density, velocity, lift and wing area.
drag, lift, thrust and weight.

wave drag, lift, weight and thrust.
Mach, drag, thrust and lift.

ao op

The two pilot controllable factors that are common to the production
of thrust, drag and lift are

air density and throttle setting.
air density and true airspeed.
true airspeed and lift coefficient.
lift coefficient and air density.

po op

While purely inverted with 5 Gs indicated on the cockpit G meter,
the aircraft would actually be turning with a radial G of

a. 4.0.
b. 5.0.
c. 5.87.
d. 6.0.

During supersonic flight, the aerodynamic center shifts ;
and the aircraft becomes stable.

a aft, more

b. aft, less

c forward, less
d. forward, more


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_54.jpeg:
5. Turn performance is measured by

radial G and true airspeed.
radial G and turn rate.
radial G and turn radius.
turn rate and turn radius.

po op

6. Maintaining a level 60° bank turn while increasing airspeed will
result in turn radius being

a. increased.
b. decreased.
c. faster.

d. unaffected.

7. Corner velocity is defined as the

a. speed at which the highest turn rate can be achieved.
b. speed at which the smallest turn radius can be achieved.
c. speed at which maximum G can be sustained.
d. minimum speed at which maximum G can be obtained.
8. An optimum turn in the F-15E is performed at units
AOA.
a. 8-10
b. 10-15
c. 16-22
d. 30

AAM-1 E-2


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_55.jpeg:
KCAS

0 200 400 600 800 1000
32 ALT = 5000
fs WT = 55,630
§
g wy
cS)
24 x
RJ
oO A
Lu
”n
C)
Lu
OQ 16 : 8G
Lu
< 3 oo
z -5
s q
ke 8 5
BS 46,000 F1
aG
~10 [3G] | 32,000 FT
2G
0
0.0 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.6

MACH NUMBER

AAM-01-30

Figure F - 1.

Using the EM diagram shown above, corner velocity is

a. 4650 knots.
b. 480 knots.
c. 530 knots.
d. 590 knots.


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_56.jpeg:
0 200 400 600 800 1000
32 ALT = 5000
& WT = 55,630
y &é
24 s&
RJ
oO &
Lu
no
)
G 16
ag 20 8S
E 15 x
s 10 ek
zm -5
w~ h
= 5 AB 7G
ee 46,000 F
-10| [8G] 32,000 FT
2G
0
0.0 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.6

MACH NUMBER

AAM-01-30

Figure F - 2.

Using the EM diagram shown above, what is the maximum
sustainable G?

a. 4.0
b. 5.0
c. 6.1
d. 7.0


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_57.jpeg:
AC
AOA

CAS

CG
C,
EM

FRL

GLOSSARY

Aerodynamic center

Angle of attack

Control augmentation system
Coefficient of drag

Center of gravity

Coefficient of lift

Energy maneuverability
Fuselage reference line

Radial G

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-1

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

BASIC AERODYNAMICS

Tremendous technological advances have been made and will continue to
be made to take the utmost advantage of the aerodynamic forces that
affect our aircraft in flight. The aerodynamic forces themselves, however,
have not changed since the Wright brothers’ first flight at Kitty Hawk,
NC. Figure D-1 depicts the four aerodynamic forces that continually act
on an aircraft in flight.

LIFT

WEIGHT

AAM-01-01

Figure D - 1. Aerodynamic Forces.

Knowing what factors affect these forces and which of the factors we can
control is absolutely essential to the fighter aircrew.

Bear in mind that the following discussion is only a review of basic
aerodynamics and is intended for use by some who may not have a
thorough understanding of aerodynamic principles. It does contain some
oversimplifications in places, and should not be used to satisfy research
requirements for your Ph.D. in Aerodynamics.

AAM-1


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_8.jpeg:
Lift

Lift is the component of the aerodynamic force that is perpendicular to the
relative wind.

Lift = 2 air density X velocity squared X coefficient of lift X wing
surface area (L = 2 rv’C;s).

Since wing surface area cannot be controlled (S = 608.0 ft? for the F-15E),
consider the other lift force variables, in which the pilot does have some
control:

e Air density (p “Rho”) - The pilot can increase air density by flying at
lower altitudes. Air at sea level is twice as dense as air at 22,000
feet.

e True airspeed (V) - Faster flight generates more lift.

¢ Coefficient of lift - The pilot can control lift by varying the angle of
attack (a). (The amount of a generated at a given airspeed is
determined by the G capability - see section on WEIGHT.)

Wing design and shape also impact coefficient of lift. Wing shape includes
camber, planform, aspect ratio and Reynolds number. This discussion is
limited to camber and planform.

e Camber - A measure of the curvature of an airfoil. (Flaps are the
only means of changing F-15E wing camber, but the pilot would not
normally use flaps in a maneuvering environment.)

e Planform - A top or bottom view of a wing/fuselage shape.
Summary:
Lift can be controlled by controlling:
p (air density) - via flight altitude

V (airspeed) - with the throttles
C,, (coefficient of lift) - using the stick (AOA)

e F-15E design contributes to the coefficient of lift through
characteristics of its own unique wing design.

AAM-1 D-2


Text from AAM-1_Performance_Management_page_9.jpeg:
Figure D-2 shows a C,, curve typical of a swept wing fighter as compared
to that of a straight wing aircraft. Note that the maximum C,, generated
by the straight wing is significantly greater than that of the swept wing.
The straight wing curve, however, drops off abruptly when a certain
angle-of-attack (AOA) is reached, indicating that the aircraft is no longer
effectively producing lift and is stalled. The swept wing curve does not
reach the value of lift that a straight wing does, but the swept wing is
capable of reaching much higher angles-of-attack and does not drop off
abruptly even after reaching an angle-of-attack which results in a
decrease in the amount of lift produced. Maintaining approximately

30 units AOA (moderate to heavy buffet without wing rock) always keeps
you close to C,MAx.

STRAIGHT WING

AOA

AAM-01-02

Figure D - 2. C, Curve Comparison.

Weight

Weight is the force of gravity and always acts toward the center of the
earth regardless of the aircraft's attitude. It does not directly oppose any
other single aerodynamic force unless one of the other aerodynamic force
vectors is positioned directly opposite the center of the earth. In straight
and level flight, lift is directly opposed by weight, but in vertical flight,
thrust or drag (depending on whether the aircraft is going up or down) is
opposed by weight.

AAM-1


