Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-8
HIGH ASPECT BASIC FIGHTER
MANEUVERS

JULY 1998

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_10.jpeg:
Lead Turn

The lead turn (Figure D-1) is your primary tool in high aspect BFM. A
lead turn is simply an attempt to decrease angle-off prior to passing the
opponent’s 3/9 line (turning prior to 3/9 passage). It can be done in any
plane (horizontal, vertical, or a combination). If you can out turn the
bandit because of your superior aircraft or more favorable airspeed
conditions, maneuver for lateral separation early. Do not expect
spectacular results after the first lead turn since a sequence of such
maneuvers is usually required to achieve a position in a weapons
envelope. You are just trying to gain a position of offensive advantage so
you can use your offensive maneuvers to slide into a weapons envelope,
and shoot something at the bandit. The lead turn is not a one time only
maneuver. It is available at every merge and should be considered every
time there is a high aspect pass. It requires patience, for rarely will you
gain the offensive after one lead turn. If you continually gain angles at
every merge, you should eventually reach a point where you can drive the
fight for a kill. The bandit can deny you a lead turn by turning into you
(i.e., attempting to lead turn you). The result of both aircraft lead turning
is a close aboard high aspect pass.

=<
-

@ O—

\ START TURN WHEN

LOS RATE INCREASES

AAM-08-01

Figure D - 1. Lead Turn

AAM-8 D-4


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_11.jpeg:
The goal of a lead turn is to reduce angle off prior to a 3/9 line passage. In
a perfectly executed lead turn, you would roll out in the bandit's six o'clock
area in the control zone, as in Figure D-1. This perfect lead turn occurs
when you have the correct amount of offset (horizontal and vertical), start
the lead turn at the right time, use the proper amount of G, and the
bandit allows you to do it.

The first task is to build the required amount of offset. This can be done
at the terminal stages of an intercept or visually after a long range tally-
ho. It is always preferable to gain turning room in both the horizontal and
vertical. This way, a single move by an unaware attacker will not take
away all your turning room. As a general rule of thumb you need 4000 to
7000 feet of turning room. Visually this can be established by placing a
high aspect bandit outside the canopy bow high (level with the upper
mirrors) or low (inside the crotch of the canopy bow) as in Figure D-2. If
after placing the bandit here you see a turn into you, the bandit is lead
turning you.

You should bring the bandit back to the nose and expect a high aspect
merge.

AAM-08-02

Figure D - 2.


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_12.jpeg:
Since pure horizontal or vertical conversions may not be tactically sound,
it may be best to use a combination. While establishing horizontal
turning room, it is your option either to get vertical turning room above or
below. Going above gives you the advantages of radial G, a smaller turn
radius (hence less required offset), easier ability to maintain your energy
state, and an easier to judge entry (because you are closer). The
disadvantages are that you are providing the bandit a lookup radar shot
and your IR missiles may be looking into a hot clutter environment.
Going below gives you the advantages of radar ground clutter, the
possibility to highlight the bandit against the sky/clouds, and it is easier
to keep sight of the bandit. The disadvantages are that you need to have
more airspeed which leads to a larger turn radius (more offset required),
more G on the conversion (more of a chance to over-G), and a harder entry
to judge. Of course, environmental considerations such as clouds or sun
levels may drive you to one or the other.

The time to start a lead turn is when you notice an increase in the bandit's
line-of-sight. When you initially offset the bandit on the outside of the
canopy bow, the bandit will appear to be stationary. As the range closes
and the offset builds, the bandit will start to move on your canopy. When
this movement starts to increase “dramatically”, it is time to initiate the
lead turn.

AAM-8 D-6


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_13.jpeg:
To perform a lead turn: unload, rotate your lift vector in front (lead) of the
bandit, and initiate your pull. Generally the pull needs to be at least 5-6
Gs, but could be more or less. A low to high lead turn requires more G, a
high to low less G. Remember, the goal is to lead turn into an unaware
bandit's control zone (i.e., approximately 3000 feet in the stern). As you
begin the lead turn the bandit will be in the vicinity of your canopy bow.
As you continue your pull the bandit will start to track toward the HUD
for about the first third to half of the turn and then gradually start
drifting up and away from the HUD. If the bandit stays stationary on the
canopy after the first part of the turn, you are on a collision course and
will collide if nothing changes. If this happens you will need to
momentarily ease off your pull (lag) to allow a line-of-sight rate to develop,
then get back onto the pull. If after the first part of the turn the bandit
continues to track through the HUD and toward the nose, you are turning
in front of the bandit (you started your lead turn too early). This is called
a “no respect” lead turn. If you take no action, and the bandit recognizes
your error, you may be defensive very shortly as in Figure D-3. Again,
you will need to momentarily ease off your pull (lag) to allow a line-of-
sight rate to develop, then get back onto the pull.

YY \ On HH

AAM-08-03

Figure D - 3. An Karly Lead Turn.


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_14.jpeg:
In summary, the lead turn is the most efficient way to win from a neutral
pass. The only time you would not want to lead turn is when you want to
bugout from the merge or want to separate for energy and then comeback
and fight. In this case, you want to stay in pure pursuit as long as
possible to create the highest HCA for the most effective separation.

Common Errors in Performing Lead Turns

e Recognizing LOS rate late or not using available turning room-
allows bandit to lead turn you, angle off is not reduced at merge.

e Lead turning before LOS becomes apparent-may put you in front of
bandit. Adjust lift vector on bandit's six and pull to pass close aboard
(turning room permitting) but always behind the bandit.

e Not lead turning after the first merge-lead turns are authorized more
than once per engagement. Do not accept continuous high aspect

passes, continue to lead turn until the bandit is dead.

e Not prepared for the merge-lean forward in seat so that you can look
past the seat and maintain the tally.

e Pure pursuit too long trying to get an auto acquisition lock on-
therefore, no turning room is achieved.

e Forgetting the separation option and ending up anchored or
defensive.

AAM-8 D-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_15.jpeg:
HIGH ASPECT BFM
Initial Moves

Assuming bugging out is not your plan, you are left with three options at
the pass.

e Blow-through-extend and comeback

e Hard turn at the pass (horizontal or oblique)
@ Go vertical

Extend and Comeback

As you merge, monitor the bandit’s direction of turn, maintain tally and
perform a separation maneuver in full AB. This option is good if your
energy is low, if entering with limited SA, or if merging with a better
turning aircraft. It also gives you turning room for a front aspect AIM-9
or AIM-120 shot. However, it is easy to lose tally during the extension,
due to rapidly increasing range, and also during the high G turn back into
the fight. More importantly, you give up your initial positional advantage
and it is dangerous against an all aspect threat. The bandit may be using
your time in extension to get turned around for a shot.

Hard Turn at the Pass

This is not a bad first move when you know the bandit can turn well but
you do not know the bandit’s energy state. It is easier to keep tally and at
corner velocity, the F-15E may have a turn rate advantage over most
bandits. Also, if the bandit elects to separate, this is the quickest way to
achieve weapons parameters and shoot him. On the other hand, it tends
to anchor the fight and requires high energy. If done incorrectly, you can
deplete all of your energy and quickly become defensive or at least
anchored.


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_16.jpeg:
Vertical Fight

The vertical fight usually results in an energy management fight which is
not a bad move against an energy/thrust deficient bandit. Initially you
want to use the pure vertical. Do not go oblique. Get the AB in early and
use max rate over the top. Since this kind of fight is unpredictable, you
may cause the bandit to lose sight. It allows you to exploit your potential
energy and use radial G. However, it is hard to keep tally and may give
the bandit a blue sky background for the shot.

Now that you have made your first move, each of these three maneuver
options can turn into a one-circle or two-circle fight. A one versus two-
circle fight is not simply your decision, but a combination of both yours
and the your bandit's strategies. The decision for a one or two-circle fight
will be made by the aircraft that turns last.

If you have made a significant lead turn, you are usually committed to
continuing your turn in that direction. To reverse your turn to force a
certain type of fight will mean throwing away the angles that you have
already built in the lead turn which equates to the bandit having that
many angles worth of advantage at the merge.

AAM-8 D-10


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_17.jpeg:
Two-Circle and One-Circle Fights

Two-Circle Fight

A two-circle fight (Figure D-4) occurs when you fly across each others
extended six flight path. The second merge normally occurs after
approximately 270° of turn. The two-circle fight gives you the opportunity
to fight an intimidation fight (max turn and point at the bandit at longer
ranges) or an energy fight (sustained turn, conserve energy, and watch).
It allows you to use your better turn rate/radius, allows use of all aspect
weaponry and HOTAS, and if things are not going well, it provides a
better separation opportunity. The two-circle fight offers you a chance for
an AIM-9, AIM-7, or AIM-120 shot, but it is the long way around thus
requiring much more distance/time to kill the bandit. Also, do not forget it
gives the bandit the same options and maintaining a tally may be more
difficult against a smaller aircraft.

\

AAM-08-04

Figure D - 4. Two-Circle Fight.


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_18.jpeg:
The two-circle fight may be used for some of the following reasons:
Performance of Aircraft

The bandit is a better turning aircraft.

Airspeed

Your airspeed is much higher than the bandit’s thus drastically increasing
your turn radius versus the bandit’s.

Energy

A two-circle fight tends to be a much faster fight than a one-circle fight
allowing greater separation potential.

Weapons

Provides you more room for all-aspect weapons employment and better
HOTAS capability.

Unknown Bandit

Allows you time to evaluate the bandit’s aircraft and flying skill and offers
better opportunity for separation.

AAM-8 D-12


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_19.jpeg:
One-Circle Fight

Both aircraft turn the same way (Figure D-5). It is clearly the shortest
route to a min time kill opportunity. Additionally, it jams the bandit’s
long range ordnance and is good against a turn deficient bandit. There
are some disadvantages though. You are giving up turning room. The
fight will probably beat your energy down and your all-aspect missiles will
also be jammed. This type of fight is usually only attempted when you
enjoy a significant turn advantage over your adversary.

—

AAM-08-05

Figure D - 5. One-Circle Fight.

Some considerations for a one-circle fight are:
Performance of Aircraft

Your turn radius is smaller than the bandit’s. Example: F-15E versus F-4
type aircraft.

Airspeed

The bandit’s airspeed is much greater than yours (rate/radius).

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the

F-15E, its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but
is to be used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications
and technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-6, February, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_20.jpeg:
Handling Characteristics

Your aircraft's slow-speed handling is much better than the bandit’s.
One-circle fights can end up in a scissors.

Tactical Surprise

Many times the bandit may be surprised by this move and make a
mistake giving you an advantage.

A one-circle fight normally is not a sustained energy fight, it is a nose
position fight. So, once committed, you must get your nose to the bandit
quickly and force the fight by aggressive lead turns.

High Aspect BFM Considerations

High Speed/Poor Turning Bandit

When fighting a bandit that has excellent thrust but poor turn capability,
you must intimidate the bandit and force a defensive turn that will
deplete energy. Above corner airspeed, your jets are the same; but once
you are both below corner, you have the advantage.

Here you want to go for a one-circle fight. You want to get inside the
bandit’s turn circle ASAP, without bleeding off all of your airspeed. You
may have exclusive use of the vertical against this type of bandit; use it to
help you get inside the larger turn circle. Hit the merge with 450 knots
and slow to corner where you can out-rate the bandit in the turn. Use lag
as required but keep the pressure on to keep the bandit turning and losing
energy. You can expect the bandit to extend whenever possible to try to
keep the fight fast and at some point, take the fight up and give you a
chance to make a mistake and get too slow.

Take FOX 1s, 2s and 3s and force defensive maneuvers that deplete
energy. Keep your nose in control of the horizon. At the top of the egg
below 350 knots you can use horizontal turning room because the bandit
cannot exploit the room above you. Take a small bite with a vertical lead
turn on each pass but do not get greedy.

AAM-8 D-14


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_21.jpeg:
Common errors are pulling too late to use the lead turn available resulting
in no appreciable gain, not forcing the bandit to slow below 420 knots and
exploiting your turn rate advantage, or depleting all your energy and
ending up slow and in the middle of the bandit’s turn circle with no shot
opportunity.

Slow Speed/Good Turning Bandit

Since this bandit is probably thrust limited, AB allows you to better
sustain your turns and energy and to exploit the vertical. The bandit, on
the other hand, will probably be able to generate max angles at slow
speeds and would like to get you in a knife fight. Therefore, keep your
energy high enough to sustain it during turns while driving the bandit’s
energy down to a point that gives you a total sanctuary in the vertical. A
game plan might be to force a two-circle fight. Get the bandit to bleed off
energy early and go for a level or low to high lead turning pass. Now with
an energy and airspeed advantage, take the fight vertical using an
optimum pull. Climb well above the bandit and put your lift vector in lead
(vertical). You can expect the bandit to try to force you to make an energy
mistake. The key is the 2nd and 3rd merge. If the bandit lead turns low,
go high to counter it. If you both take it up, use AB and airspeed to build
exclusive vertical turning room. Use 5-6 Gs and not 7-8 Gs in the pull.
The bandit will probably be able to go over the top once or twice and then
no longer. Once you are above the bandit, go for the control position. Use
your lift vector and slowly work toward guns. Remember if you decide to
go for a snapshot, have over-the-top airspeed otherwise, the bandit may
try to arc your oblique turn.

The most common errors in this type fight are not keeping continuous
pressure on the bandit and allowing a slow bandit to intimidate you with
nose position and become energy equal to you. Also, another error is using
max turns instead of sustained turns thereby depleting your own energy
and denying yourself the vertical.

Good Turn Rate and Radius Bandit

This is a very tough opponent to fight. If you end up in a fight with this
type of bandit, you would like to exploit the HOTAS and all-aspect missile
capability of the F-15E. Remember though, this bandit may have very
good capabilities as well (including the AA-11s off-boresight capability).

For this type of bandit, you want to make the kill as quickly as possible.

Give the bandit a secondary BFM problem by putting ordnance in the air
as soon as possible. Try to take the fight two-circle to allow you to use

D-15 AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_22.jpeg:
your all-aspect capability. Use whatever auto acq mode will give you the
fastest lock, but remember no-lock AIM-120s (if you are sure there are no
friendlies near or you can ensure shot deconfliction) or boresight AIM-9s if
anything delays your radar lock. You must respect the bandit’s nose, so
maneuver as appropriate and remember to employ chaff and/or flares as
appropriate. Sustain or regain energy when possible and strive to gain a
lead turn advantage on subsequent merges. If you are not gaining or
seem to be losing advantage on each pass, look for opportunities to
separate. Knowing your enemy and their ordnance capabilities can save
your life in this situation.

Common errors are not flying your best 1v1 BFM and missing shot
opportunities. Proper energy management is crucial against this type of
bandit. Do not allow the bandit to win the rate fight as a result of your
mistakes.

CONCLUSION

The important fact to be remembered is that regardless of the degree of
maneuvering affordable, once engaged you must employ your best 1v1
BFM until the kill is achieved or the situation dictates or permits a
separation. To be well versed across the entire spectrum of BFM, you
must be exposed to all elements, high speed and low speed, offensive and
defensive, during your training. This is the only way to ensure that when
the time arises, you will have the skills necessary to employ your jet
effectively and efficiently in combat.

AAM-8 D-16


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_23.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
A lead turn should be initiated

at 3/9 passage.

after 3/9 passage with good energy.

prior to 3/9 passage with when LOS increases “dramatically.”
when LOS rate begins to decrease.

pe op

Turning room should usually be achieved in

the same plane as the bandit.

the horizontal plane.

the vertical plane.

a combination of both horizontal and vertical.

pe op

The goal of a perfectly executed lead turn against a nonmaneuvering
bandit would be to roll out directly behind the bandit after 180° of
turn. The amount of turning room needed to execute this maneuver
is

a. 6000 feet.
b. one turn diameter (yours).
c. one turn diameter (the bandit’s).
d. 9000 feet.
The determines whether you will engage in a one-circle or two-
circle fight.
fighter

last aircraft to turn

a
b. bandit
c

d aircraft with the most effective lead turn

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_24.jpeg:
l. c¢
2. d
3. b
4. ¢
AAM-8

ANSWERS


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_25.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

To determine when to start a lead turn from a high aspect engagement, you
might use

bandit's LOS rate increase.

6000 range.

apparent planform of bandit aircraft.
radar lock-on inside 2 nm.

pe op

A characteristic of a two circle fight is that it tends to

transition to a slow speed flying contest.

be either an energy fight or an intimidation (turn and point) fight.
stay inside min range for your all aspect ordnance.

remain two circle until someone separates.

af of

To properly execute a lead turn, when LOS starts to increase, you should

set your lift vector and start your pull.
a. above the bandit

b. in front of the bandit

c. slightly aft of the bandit

d. at the bandit’s high six

A one-circle fight would be your preferred option against which of the
following types of bandit?

Slow speed bandit with a good turn rate

A bandit with a good turn rate and radius

A bandit that is highly maneuverable

A bandit with high speed and poor turn capability

pe op


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_26.jpeg:
AAM-8

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_27.jpeg:
ACM

BFM

DBFM

HABFM

HUD

LOS

OBFM

WEZ

GLOSSARY

Air combat maneuvers

Basic fighter maneuvers

Defensive basic fighter maneuvers
High aspect basic fighter maneuvers
Head-up display

Line of sight

Offensive basic fighter maneuvers

Weapons employment zone

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

I
S \
cS)
a fpr ty

COVER

HIGH ASPECT BASIC FIGHTER MANEUVERS
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to an understanding of the successful
application of basic fighter maneuvers (BFM). It will familiarize you with
the fundamentals of BFM and factors affecting their performance in the
air-to-air arena. It will provide knowledge needed to effectively employ
the F-15E against an airborne adversary.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.00. ceecccccesneecesneeeessneecesaeeesseeesssaeesessaeesesaeeeesaeeees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)........00..eeeeseeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...0... eee eeeeeeeeeeeees C-1
CL TEAT sos sures sas cos cores canis anais cru amen sexs ansis cas mo Mas oes GSA MaRS Seis MNS Ka HOEK Saws OnE CoReD MoM Ma On D-1
NOTE TAKING OUTLINE...00.. eee eeseeeeeeneeeessneeensaeeeessaeeseseeeenaees E-1
SONOS RII “Me tly Me) Medel see see ees es sec ante es se ane cea tame see ese ap ee te se: ce F-1
GLOSSARY. eee eecceessceecesneeeesseeecesaeecesaeesesaeecessaeeeesaeeessaeesesaeesesaeeens G-1

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Given a specific scenario with two aircraft in a high aspect situation,
identify the options and counteroptions which will most likely result
in achieving an advantage.

2. Given two aircraft approaching each other in a high aspect scenario,
identify the visual cue for starting, and proper procedure for
performing a lead turn.

AAM-8 B-1


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1.

Zs

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
end of text quiz.

Read the BFM section of MCM 38-8, Vol XVII.

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-8

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

An understanding of the concepts and maneuvers related to high aspect
BFM (HABFM) is a crucial step in your training in the Strike Eagle. You
must understand how to perform a lead turn before attempting the two-
ship maneuvers you will be expected to perform during ACM to defeat a
bandit. More importantly, this is a realistic way to start an air-to-air
engagement since the normal entry to a fight in the “real world” starts
with an intercept leading to a high aspect merge with an adversary.
HABFM may also be necessary for short range engagements with
previously undetected bandits.

You must understand the basic concepts of offensive BFM and defensive
BFM and apply them to succeed in turning a high aspect pass into a fight
where you have a position of advantage. In high aspect BFM, you will
learn to maneuver to an offensive advantage from a high aspect setup,
and learn when and how to separate from the fight if the situation
deteriorates.

BFM MECHANICS AND DEFINITIONS

High aspect BFM objectives are similar to offensive BFM: maneuver to a
WEZ and kill the bandit, maneuver to an offensive position, or separate
before becoming defensive.

As you learned from OBFM and DBFM, good energy management is
crucial for you to gain and maintain an advantage during any BFM
situation. Energy includes not only the kinetic energy you gain by
pushing up your throttles, but also the potential energy you gain by using
the vertical to your advantage.

Capability to use vertical turning room on the initial maneuver to achieve
offensive advantage is a concept new to you at this point. While you
probably want to start a fight very near to corner velocity for OBFM and
DBFM, it may be necessary to be above corner velocity at the start of a
high aspect BFM engagement. This is especially true if making a low-to-
high lead turn on a bandit since you will lose energy during the uphill
turn. You must monitor your speed, G available, and maneuvering
capability to maximize your ability to exploit turning room.

AAM-8


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_8.jpeg:
When you meet another bandit head-on in a visual engagement, you have
three basic options or combinations of options.

e FOX-1, FOX-2, or FOX-3 from front, then:

° Blow-through to bugout
° Separate for energy then re-engage, or
° Turn to engage

You may elect any of these options initially depending upon conditions, or
may elect to employ a sequence of these options. If the ROE, your
remaining ordnance, and your weapons system's status permit, your first
move will probably be to shoot a FOX-1, FOX-2, or FOX-3 from the front
quadrant. Use your auto-acquisition modes to acquire the radar lock-on
(if you do not have one already), satisfy the parameters for the weapon
selected, and shoot. You can also employ the AIM-9M or the AIM-120
visually without a lock. Remember deconfliction criteria especially when
launching without a lock. If you can launch the first missile, the situation
is now 2v1 in your favor. Even if your missile is defeated, the bandit’s
energy state should be significantly lower and you have improved your
odds for successfully employing one of your other options. If the bandit
launches the first missile, you will have to react defensively to defeat that
missile before you can continue the engagement. You may, however, have
an opportunity to launch your own missile as you initiate your defensive
reaction.

During the early stages of the 1v1 engagement, you have an excellent
chance to bugout from the fight if conditions such as fuel, weapons,
aircraft problems, or other bandits in the neighborhood make this your
most intelligent option. You will have high heading crossing angles so you
can accelerate, blow-through the merge and depart the fight using a
separation maneuver. If your bandit does not see you, try to deny a tally
by maintaining as close to pure pursuit as possible until you merge. If the
bandit sees you and starts to turn toward you, take a pure pursuit type
course to minimize turning room and consider a very high angle gun
attack (turning room permitting) as you merge. Remember, the bandit
may try to use the gun against you also.

The option to engage in a turning fight is your third (and probably least
desired) alternative. If conditions are favorable and/or your mission
requires you to eliminate the bandit, you should lead turn and pick your
entry for a one/two-circle fight.

AAM-8 D-2


Text from AAM-8_High_BFM_page_9.jpeg:
Turning Room

Turning room is displacement from an adversary’s flight path plane that
allows you to execute a turn to roll out at six o’clock. In a perfect world,
the bandit would never see you and allow you to pick the amount of
turning room you need to execute a lead turn and roll out directly at six
o’clock. While your bandit may be generous enough to allow you to do this
during a lead turn exercise in training, you probably will not be lucky
enough for this to happen in a tactical situation unless the bandit is no-joy
with no situation awareness (SA).

The amount of turning room you will be able to acquire and use will vary,
but if you desire to do a well-timed 180° lead turn to roll out at a bandit’s
six o’clock, you would need one turn diameter (yours, not the bandit’s).
Remember the turn diameter will vary based on your TAS and G. Using
the vertical also affects the size of the turn diameter as you work with
(going downhill) or against (going uphill) God’s G. Tactical decisions that
may affect your choice of turning room above, below, or in the same
horizontal plane are addressed in MCM 3-1.

A key point to remember is that turning room available to you is also
available to the bandit. If the bandit sees you and chooses to start and
lead turn on you, it will affect your game plan.


