Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-4
GROUND CONTROLLED INTERCEPTS
(GCI)
FEBRUARY 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_10.jpeg:
The advantages of manual radars are that they are mobile and are excellent at the
merge. Their disadvantages are limited range, limited low level coverage and
susceptibility to electronic countermeasures.

Automated Radars (SOCC/ROCC)

Automated systems are usually located at major command centers. They receive and
display radar/communications information in their area of responsibility or sector
from various sources including manual radar sites and AWACS. Among their
responsibilities and mission capabilities are high level command and control,
establishment of a regional combined air picture and the evaluation of command
threats. They also perform normal air-to-air control.

Automated systems are operating or planned throughout the world. These systems
include Sector Operating Control Centers (SOCCs) and Region Operating Control
Centers (ROCC). You may recognize some of these by their call signs:

SOCCs

“Huntress” Griffiss AFB, NY

“Bigfoot” McChord AFB, WA

ROCC

“Top Rock” Located at Elmendorf AFB, AK; “Top
Rock” is responsible to
Alaskan/NORAD region

“Oak Grove” or “Cypress” Tyndall AFB, FL

Since automated systems are comprised of a net of manual radar sites within their
sector or area of responsibility, they provide a “Big Picture” capability for ACC, 11th
Air Force and NORAD for strategic aerospace defense. The range of automated radar
is the sum of the manual site locations. Each SOCC controls its own sector and
collectively the SOCCs cover the entire continental United States and Canada.

AAM-4 D-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_11.jpeg:
The computerized automatic tracking system tracks and displays large amounts of
information; however, its digitized displays are not good for close-in control. These
digitized displays can be as much as 5 miles off in range.

In addition to standard radios these automated systems are equipped with digital
information links which receive and combine data from AWACS and land based
components. Automated radars are also HAVE QUICK capable.

The advantages of automated radars are their long range, their command and control
services and their resistance to electronic countermeasures. Their disadvantages are
that they are poor at the merge, have limited low level coverage (radar input
dependent), are computer dependent and are restricted to fixed locations.

AWACS

The airborne warning and control system (AWACS) is a mobile GCI site located
inside a specially modified 707-320B designated the E-3. The AWACS provides
radar coverage while ground sites are relocating or are otherwise out of service. The
AWACS’s high perch behind the FEBA also provides a more advantageous view of
the battle.

The AWACS operates at around 30,000 feet MSL behind the FEBA. Depending on
altitude, the AWACS can see fighter size, low altitude aircraft at more than 200 nm.
Bomber size targets at altitude can be picked up in excess of 300 nm.

The AWACS has a pulse/pulse doppler radar, which has very little ground
interference. The AWACS’s electronic countermeasures resistance is enhanced by
sidelobe suppression. The major disadvantage of the AWACS’s radar display is that
data presented on the controller’s screen uses large computer generated symbols.
These large symbols make working fighters inside 10 nm very difficult.

D-5 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_12.jpeg:
The AWACS has a capability for ADF, secure voice, data link, HAVE QUICK and
HF communications. Although the AWACS has a total of 14 radios, they are shared
by the entire aircraft so the actual number of radios available for GCI varies. The
number of frequencies available also varies with the level of HAVE QUICK used by
the AWACS. HAVE QUICK originally used six of the twenty presets on a HAVE
QUICK UHF radio and created some delay in changing working frequencies. Later
versions freed up these frequencies and are much quicker to change. AWACS also
provides a direct line to the command authorities at the CRC.

The advantages of the AWACS are their long range surveillance, mobility, low
altitude coverage and electronic countermeasures resistance. Their disadvantages are
that they are limited at the merge, have limited communications and are
aircraft/computer dependent.

AAM-4 D-6


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_13.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

What is the stateside role of GCI?

What is the overseas role of GCI?

What is the most forward TACS component?

Where is it located?

What is the major disadvantage of the AWACS’s radar display?

D-7 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_14.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. | GCT’s stateside role is to detect and identify aircraft infringing upon U.S.
airspace.

2. | GCI’s overseas role is to assist in the offensive counter air tasks of sweep and
force protection and in the defensive counter air tasks of force or base
protection.

3. | The forward most TACS component is the forward air control post (FACP).

4. The FACP is located about 50 miles from the FEBA.

5. | The major disadvantage of the AWACS’s radar display is that its displays use
large computer generated symbols, which make working fighters inside of 10
nm very difficult.

AAM-4 D-8


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_15.jpeg:
AIRCREW/WEAPONS DIRECTOR RESPONSIBILITIES

The interface between the WD and aircrew is based on some general assumptions that
both of you must follow. You must know the wartime authentication process.
Further, you must know theater and regional airspace control procedures. You must
also know current tactics and capabilities of the threat. A complete understanding of
the states of alert, the readiness and warning systems and the appropriate rules of
engagement/training rules (ROE/TR) prepares you to use the system to its best
advantage. Finally, you must be familiar with the capabilities and limitations of the
communications, control facilities and other weapons systems that may be employed
for accomplishment of the mission.

Commit authority is subject to OPords/OPlans, command authority, ROE, commit
criteria and force commander direction. The flight leader also has the authority to
commit for the flight’s defense or when WD saturation dictates. In circumstances
where the fighter initiates a commit, the flight will inform the WD and provide the
WD with bearing and range to the target. When a flight informs a WD of a commit,
the WD will check to ensure the commit is on an appropriate target, and assist as
necessary. If the situation dictates that the commit be terminated, the WD will
transmit “SKIP IT” and give appropriate directions. The “SKIP IT” call is directive,
and the aircrew will disengage unless doing so will jeopardize the flight; in which
case the aircrew will transmit “UNABLE.” (SKIP IT, UNABLE and other words
shown in all capital letters are operational brevity codes. These codes are discussed
later in the text and are listed in Appendix G of this workbook.)

D-9 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_16.jpeg:
Continuum of Control

The continuum of control, Figure D-2, covers five levels: close, tactical, broadcast,
advisory and autonomous. There is no correlated format of target information to the
level of control. Situational awareness (SA) determines where the aircrew or WD
might be along the continuum. Transition between levels may occur rapidly and
continuously throughout any mission. The continuum allows maximum use of both
the aircrew’s and WD’s SA while minimizing missed weapons employment
opportunities due to a fixed control structure.

CLOSE
CONTROL

TACTICAL
CONTROL

BROADCAST
CONTROL

ADVISORY
CONTROL

AUTONOMOUS
OPERATIONS

TARGET AND COMMIT INFO
PROVIDED TO SPECIFIC

FLIGHTS

TARGET INFO
PROVIDED BUT
NOT TO
SPECIFIC
FLIGHT

RADAR TARGET
INFO NOT
AVAILABLE

AND NOT
PROVIDED

COMMUNI-
CATIONS

NOT AVAILABLE.
NO INFO OR
CONTROL
PASSED

COMMAND
VECTORS
GUIDE AIR-
CREW TO
INTERCEPT

AAM-4

AIRCREW RESPONSIBLE FOR TACTICAL POSITIONING

Figure D - 2. Continuum of Control.

AAM-04-02


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_17.jpeg:
Regardless of the level of control the WD and aircrew have standard responsibilities.
At all levels the WD must:

provide a situation brief (PICTURE) as time permits;

define the commit objective (KILL or ID);

provide threat and potential threat information (numbers, formation,
altitude, heading, speed);

commit fighters on the highest priority target;

monitor the intercept/engagement and provide vectors and/or bearing and
range to the target in the event the fighter loses contact on the target; and
monitor the area of responsibility for new targets, and, when necessary,
skip the current engagement and recommit fighters to higher priority
targets.

At all control levels the aircrew must:

position the aircraft and flight as necessary to accomplish the mission;
acknowledge target information as the situation permits;

notify the WD if contact is lost on a target being attacked;

call previously unreported contacts (BRA report, i.e., bearing, range,
altitude);

report essential elements of information (EEI);

report mission results;

advise the WD of fighter status; and

comply with WD directions to “SKIP IT” unless doing so will jeopardize
the flight.

D-11 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_18.jpeg:
Close Control

Close control provides the greatest degree of WD control in the continuum. It can
vary from simply providing intercept vectors to providing detailed control requiring
specific altitude, speed and heading of the fighter. The use of this control may be
dictated by the mission, or initiated by the aircrew. The aircrew requests detailed
close control by transmitting “GO CLOSE CONTROL,” or, if only vectors are
required, by transmitting “WECTORS.” The WD transmits “UNABLE” if unable to
provide this control when requested.

In addition to all of the applicable common tasks, the WD supplies vectors as briefed
or based on appropriate tactics. Tactics used should be as briefed unless armament,
environmental conditions, target altitude or ROE dictate the use of another tactic.
Altitude, speed and direction are given, if necessary, for battle management or other
command/control reasons. The aircrew completes all of the applicable common

tasks, and then complies with WD directives, or requests “VECTORS.” Close control
may be entered from another level of the continuum by transmitting “GO CLOSE
CONTROL.”

Close control dialog between a flight and GCI/AWACS might take this format:

! Fighter call sign.

! Objective (KILL or ID). Once this is acknowledged, it is not repeated
unless it changes.

! Target position is given in bearing and distance. Bearing is given in three
digits “ZERO NINE ZERO,” and distance is given in whole numbers
“TWENTY-TWO.” “ESTIMATE” is used if the information cannot be
accurately determined. If a “BULLSEYE” or grid system is used, that
information must also be included.

! Target altitude is given in feet or in the AFTTP 3-1 bands, e.g., LOW,
MEDIUM, HIGH, (see Appendix G).

! Flight size and formation is given, e.g., “HEAVY, LINE ABREAST.”

! Target heading/maneuver. Heading given in cardinal direction. Tactical
maneuvers given in clear, concise transmissions: “BANDITS SPLIT,
FLANKING.”

! Threat type/role if known.

! Other specific observations “SLOW,” “FAST.”

AAM-4 D-12


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_19.jpeg:
Tactical Control

Tactical control dialogue between a flight and the GCI/AWACS might sound like

this:

FIGHTER:

GCI:

FIGHTER:

GCI:

FIGHTER:

GCI:

FIGHTER:

FIGHTER:

GCI:

FIGHTER:

FIGHTER:

“DRAGNET, EAGLE 01,”
“ROGER, EAGLE 01, WHAT STATE?”

“EAGLE 01 AS FRAGGED” or “EAGLE 01 4
RADAR, 2 HEAT, GUN, 20 MINUTES.”

“EAGLE 01, DRAGNET, KILL, ZERO NINE
ZERO, FIFTY, MEDIUM, NORTH.”

“AUTHENTICATE ALPHA BRAVO”
“AUTHENTICATION CHARLIE”

“EAGLE 01, COMMITTED, ZERO EIGHT
ZERO, FORTY-FIVE, TWENTY-FIVE
THOUSAND.” (BRA Report).

“EAGLE 01, BANDIT BANDIT, FOX THREE.”

“EAGLE 01, ADDITIONAL BOGEY, ONE
TWO ZERO, SIXTY-FIVE, BEAMING.”

“EAGLE 01.”

“EAGLE 01, SPLASH, BOGEY DOPE.”

D- 13 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E, its systems
and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be used in conjunction
with other standard Air Force publications and technical manuals. If you find any
differences between the material contained herein and other governing regulations,
adhere to the regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC 27531.

Supersedes: AAM-4, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Change # Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_20.jpeg:
Tactical control enables maximum use of aircrew and WD radar SA to accomplish the
mission. The WD is not responsible for vectors or intercept geometry. Tactical
control provides the aircrew with target information and commit objective. This is
the standard employment level for operational and training missions.

Aircrew procedures: Communicate to support the SA of all players. Keep the WD
informed of status and intentions. Call sign usage is critical.

WD procedures: Keep aircrews informed on all situations affecting their mission or
execution. Listen.

Broadcast Control

Broadcast control is a means for WDs to support air operations in a covert, saturated
or low SA environment. It is informative and not directive in nature. Target
information is not addressed to a specific aircrew and is passed by referencing a
designated location or grid system. Upon implementation, aircrews should call when
committing, using the BULLSEYE or grid system reference, to enhance the
coordination among fighters on the same frequency.

Broadcast control information is prioritized in the following order:

! Track designation, e.g., BANDIT, BOGEY, GROUP,

! The reference system in use, e.g., BULLSEYE, a geographic reference or a
grid name,

! The bearing and range from reference to target,

! Target heading,

! The estimated number of targets if applicable or known.

When transmitted, this information might sound like, “BANDIT; BULLSEYE; TWO
FIVE ZERO, TWENTY; NORTHWEST; HEAVY.”

AAM-4 D-14


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_21.jpeg:
A grid system is another reference system used in some theaters. The information is
the same as for other types of broadcast control. However, the area designator and
grid sub-sector replace BULLSEYE information. An example on broadcast control
using a grid system is shown in Figure D-3.

WACO AREA

AREA DESIGNATOR
AND SUBSECTOR
REPLACE "BULLSEYE"

"BANDIT; WACO; FIVE ALPHA; SOUTH"

AAM-04-03

Figure D - 3. Grid Reference.

D-15 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_22.jpeg:
Advisory Control

If the controlling agency loses their radar, shuts down their radar to avoid attack, loses
effectiveness due to countermeasures, or the fighters are outside radar coverage, the
WD goes to advisory control. Advisory control is a radio monitoring mode where the
WD maintains communications with aircrews either directly, through a radio relay or
through another agency or facility. Advisory control allows command authorities to
monitor the air battle, manage fighter flow, pass intelligence, direct aircraft and move
CAPs. The WD indicates that he is operating in the advisory control mode by
transmitting “MIDNIGHT, MIDNIGHT.” The WD still passes available information
on threats, friendly forces, command decisions and other information requested by the
aircrews when able. As in broadcast control, aircrews are responsible for calling
“CONTACT,” “COMMIT” and “ENGAGED,” to keep the WD and other fighters
informed.

Autonomous Control

Autonomous control is used any time the aircrew cannot receive information or
guidance from the controlling agency. This may occur when communications are
lost, degraded or when the fighters are operating outside of the radio coverage.
During autonomous control, which is not preplanned, both the aircrew and WD are
responsible for attempting to reestablish communications and continue making calls
in the blind until communications are reestablished.

Control Considerations

When the aircrew/flight lead checks in, regardless of the level of control, he contacts
the GCI net with his call sign and any deviations/aborts that will affect the fragged
(scheduled) mission. The WD then authenticates (if necessary), and provides a
working frequency to the aircrew. This is also time to give situation briefs
(PICTURE) and IFF/SIF checks. The working WD will be on the working frequency.
The working WD needs to know your armamentByou can respond by giving “as
FRAGGED,” if your armament load is the same as what was briefed for the mission.
If your armament is other than what was briefed, you should give the number of each
type of missile using RADAR and HEAT as appropriate to indicate the type of
missile. RADAR indicates AIM-120 or AIM-7 and HEAT indicates AIM-9 missiles.
You do not need to report the number of 20mm rounds on board, if you have enough
20mm to “COMMIT,” then just state “GUN.”

AAM-4 D - 16


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_23.jpeg:
Finally, give your fuel state in time on station (in minutes). An initial check-in should
sound like this:

Fit Lead: “DRAGNET, BRUTE 21, 160 AT 60 OFF SEYMOUR
JOHNSON.”
GCI: “ROGER BRUTE 21, DRAGNET HAS RADAR

CONTACT. WHAT STATE?”

Fit Lead: “BRUTE 21, LEAD HAS 4 RADAR, 4 HEAT, GUN,
PLUS 50 MINUTES.”

Return to base (RTB) procedures are the same regardless of the type of control used.
The type of conflict and theater of operations determine the controlling agency’s
priorities and the urgency of recovering fighter aircraft. On initial contact with the
controlling agency, aircrew will give their call sign and recovery base. As conditions
permit, the WD then provides recovery instructions to include base status, copies
in-flight reports, assists in minimum risk procedures and accomplishes a hand-off to
the receiving agency.

D-17 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_24.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. | Which type of control provides the greatest degree of control in the continuum?

2. How does tactical control differ from close control?

3. | What type of control uses a designated location, series of locations, or a grid
system as a means of passing target information?

4. When is advisory control used?

5. | How does the WD inform you that advisory control is in effect?

6. | When do you use autonomous control?

AAM-4 D-18


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_25.jpeg:
ANSWERS
Close control

In tactical control aircrews are provided with target information and commit
objectives, but not vectors.

Broadcast control
Advisory control is a radio monitor mode used when the controlling agency
loses radar, shuts down radar to avoid attack, loses effectiveness due to

countermeasures or the fighters are outside radar coverage.

The WD informs you that advisory control is in effect by transmitting
“MIDNIGHT, MIDNIGHT.”

You use autonomous control anytime that you cannot receive information or
guidance from the controlling agency.

D-19 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_26.jpeg:
OPERATIONAL BREVITY CODE

The operational brevity words in AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1 are the baseline for
communication procedures. This code is a collection of succinct phrases or
individual words used to convey a more complex message in the tactical environment.
It is important that you have a working knowledge of the brevity code that is found in
AFTTP 3-1. Here are some examples:

BENT Identified system inoperative
BUZZER Electronic communications jamming
FADED Previous radar contact is lost
GADGET Fire control radar

HOLDING HANDS Aircraft are in visual formation

LOW Target altitude below 10,000 feet AGL
SNAP Request for immediate vector to target

GCI/aircrew communications join these words, e.g., BENT GADGET means
inoperable radar. A GCI conversation using the brevity codes might sound like this:

GCI: EAGLE 21 WHAT STATE?
(Translation - What type and how much
ordnance and fuel do you have left?)

Aircrew: EAGLE 21 IS WINCHESTER, BINGO, AND
RTB!
(Translation - I do not have anymore radar
missiles, heat seeking missiles or bullets. If I
stay here another five minutes I will run out of
gas and have to walk out; Iam going home!)

AAM-4 D - 20


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_27.jpeg:
A directive commentary (from WD during close control) or set of standard phrases
are used with some brevity codes, for example:

Heading is given as “VECTOR XXX” in three digits.

Altitude is “MAINTAIN FLIGHT LEVEL.”

Speed is “MAINTAIN MACH POINT X” in Mach number.

Geometry selection, if given, will be “CUTOFF” (fastest course to target),
“STERN?” (roll out behind target), or “PURSUIT” (heading to bogey).

! Turn direction: Left or Right.

|
!
!
I

In combat, communication with GCI is critical; it must be clear, concise and to the
point. By using the brevity code, you say it all.

“EAGLE 01, CONTACT, ZERO NINE ZERO, TWENTY-ONE, 33,000,
BEAM, WEST.”

D-21 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_28.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. | What is the purpose of the operational brevity code?

2. Using the operational brevity code in section G of this workbook, what is the
translation of “CONTACT GORILLA LOW?”

AAM-4 D - 22


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_29.jpeg:
ANSWERS

The operational brevity code provides succinct phrases or individual words to
convey a more complex message in a tactical environment.

Radar contact on a large force of indeterminable numbers and formation below
10,000 feet AGL.

D - 23 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

COVER

GROUND CONTROLLED INTERCEPTS (GCI

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to an understanding of the radar systems available to aid

you in the intercept environment. It covers how GCI and AWACS can provide

various amounts of information, procedures and responsibilities you need to know to

maximize effectiveness.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION |... cee ceececesceeneeceaecnseeesaeesaaecaecseeesaeesaeessaesnseesseeeeaeeenaeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CRO) ...... eee eeceeeeeeeeereeeneeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS 0.0... cece esseceeeeeeeeeeneeenaeens C-1
TEXT oo eee cccccceseceesseeeesaeeeesaeesesaecessaecsesaecesasecessaecessescesaeeceseescsseeecseescseeeesaes D-1
END OP TEXT QUIZ... ieee ceecceeseeenceceaecneeeseneesaaecsaecsseesseeesaaecaeeneenseeenaaees E-1
GLOSSARY oo. eecceeceeeceescecseeeseeeseeecsaecaecnseessseeesuecuaeceeeseneecsaecaeeeseessaaesaeenaeenees F-1
HANDOUT 000 eee ececssecnnecnseeesseecaaeceaeenseeesaeesaaecsaecseessaeesaeecuecnseesseeeeaeeenaeens G-1

AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_30.jpeg:
AIR-TO-AIR TRAINING RULES
Brief and Debrief Requirements

For normal day-to-day training, briefings and debriefings will be accomplished
face-to-face. When face-to-face briefings and debriefings are either not practical or
possible, telephonic briefings must be conducted. When circumstances prevent
face-to-face or telephonic briefings, airborne briefings may be conducted.
MAJCOMs may authorize alternate briefing procedures for unusual circumstances.

Face-to-face and telephonic briefings should cover the items in the air-to-air
coordination/briefing guide shown in AFI 11-214. The briefing should include, but is
not limited to: working area, scenario, tactics, training rules, “KNOCK-IT-OFP”
criteria, alternate missions, rendezvous and emergencies.

Debriefings will critically assess mission execution. Debriefings are also a very good
place to discuss expanding/changing roles with the WDs to increase their awareness
of air-to-air operations.

Airspace
Training will be conducted in designated airspace. Avoiding lateral airspace spillouts
is a joint WD/aircrew responsibility. Avoiding vertical spillouts is the sole

responsibility of the aircrew. Supersonic flight will only be accomplished in
designated supersonic areas.

AAM-4 D-24


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_31.jpeg:
Training Responsibilities

The WD is responsible for advising aircrews of any previously unreported aircraft
within 10 miles that are a potential hazard. This information should include the
bearing, range, heading and altitude of the aircraft (if available). The WD must also
advise the aircrew any time that the controlling agency cannot support at least
broadcast control, in which case the aircrew may elect to continue the attack provided
he can provide safe separation. The WD is also responsible for making periodic
“CHECK FUEL” advisories to assist aircrews in fuel awareness. The WD advises the
aircrew when approaching airspace boundaries and provides other pertinent
information, such as airspace changes, weather in the working areas, and system
degrades. Unless prebriefed to the contrary the WD will make the following calls:

! Vectors to position aircraft to set up activity.
! Advise aircrews of Minimum Safe Altitude (MSA).
! A range call at 10 nm from any merge.

The aircrew is responsible for acknowledging all WD airspace and safety-related calls
and staying within the confines of the designated training area.

Training Rules

Training rules (previously called ROE or training ROE) are peacetime rules,
procedures and standards governing air-to-air training that, when violated, jeopardize
flight safety. They should not be confused with rules of engagement which are
specific constraints applicable to operational real-world peacetime, wartime and/or
contingency mission employment. Training rules are listed in AFI 11-214. Rules of
engagement are found in OPlans, contingency plans or other operational documents.

Separation of Aircraft

Hard altitudes or altitude blocks will be assigned to provide vertical separation for
nonvisual setups. A minimum of 1000 feet vertical separation (500 feet vertical
separation below 5000 feet AGL) between altitude blocks is required.

D-25 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_32.jpeg:
Fighters may not transit or enter the altitude block of any adversary unless the
adversary is:

!
!

beyond 10 nm;

within 10 nm, but not a conflict (i.e., collision potential), based on
situational awareness;

in visual contact; or

fighter verbally confirms the adversary’s altitude and maintains required
vertical separation. Each participant must use “see and avoid” techniques
to ensure his flight path is clear. Any attacker losing sight will maneuver
away from the defender’s last known position. If a defender loses sight
and SA, he will maneuver predictably.

No friendly aircraft will be maneuvered within minimum range of another friendly
aircraft. Minimum range is found in MAJCOM or service directives.

Termination criteria listed in AFI 11-214 apply to air-to-air training. MAJCOM
supplements address specific separation requirements for day and night/weather
operations. The following are examples of termination criteria:

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

AAM-4

Drift to area boundary

Strangers become a factor

Minimum altitude/clouds approached
Maneuvering limits are reached

Engaged aircraft begins air-to-surface delivery
Attacker becomes defensive at low altitude
Situational awareness is lost

Radio failure is recognized

Any aircraft rocks its wings

Desired learning objective is achieved
Stalemate occurs

A dangerous situation is developing
Minimum/BINGO fuel is reached

Over-G occurs

“Knock-it-off’ or “Terminate” is called


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_33.jpeg:
Terminate Versus Knock-it-off

Terminate and knock-it-off mean the same thing, but they vary in scope. Terminate
applies to an individual aircraft or flight, but knock-it-off applies to all participants. If
any flight member, WD or ACMI RTO perceives a flight safety hazard, the call
“knock-it-off” will be made, at which time all participants will cease maneuvering

and acknowledge with a call sign. If any participant wants an individual aircraft or
flight to cease maneuvering, clearly identify the aircraft or flight and transmit
“TERMINATE,” followed by a wing rock if conditions permit. The aircraft/flight
will stop maneuvering and acknowledge with a radio call and wing rock if conditions
permit. If any doubt or confusion exists, or safety is jeopardized, use a
“KNOCK-IT-OFF” call so that all participants will immediately cease maneuvering.

D-27 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_34.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. | What is the preferred form of briefing/debriefing?

2. How do training rules differ from ROE?

AAM-4 D - 28


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_35.jpeg:
ANSWERS
Face-to-face is the preferred form of briefing/debriefing.
Training rules are peacetime rules, procedures, and standards governing
air-to-air training that, when violated, jeopardize flight safety; but rules of

engagement are specific constraints applicable to operational real-world
peacetime, wartime and/or contingency mission employment.

D - 29 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_36.jpeg:
MANEUVERING CATEGORIES

To ensure flight safety, a specific level of maneuvering is used to comply with
training rules. There are four maneuvering categories listed in AFI 11-214 for use
during air-to-air training missions. These categories are unlimited, limited, restricted
and nonmaneuvering.

Unlimited

In the unlimited category there are no restrictions except those of the aircraft flight
manual operational limits. Unlimited maneuvering requires you to be above 5000 feet
AGL in day VMC with a discernible horizon.

Limited

During day visual air-to-air operations when descending below 5000’ AGL or
conducting operations below 5000’ AGL, limited is the maximum maneuvering
category. Limited maneuvering is to be used at night or if encountering weather not
meeting cloud clearance or horizon requirement. Limited maneuvering is the same as
unlimited except for the following constraints:

! A defender may react to an attacker with an extension/separation and/or
turn not to exceed 180° after the attacker crosses the defender’s 3/9 line.

! Attackers engaging each other may turn 180° maximum in an attempt to
shoot each other.

! Attackers engaging defenders may turn until the defender terminates the
engagement, a kill is achieved or the defender turns 180°.

Restricted

Restricted maneuvering allows you to make heading changes of up to 60° either side
of course.

Nonmaneuvering
Nonmaneuvering requires that you maintain a constant heading, airspeed and altitude.

Maximum maneuvering during air-to-air training is based on meteorological
conditions (day/night/weather), altitude and configuration.

AAM-4 D - 30


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_37.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

What are your restrictions when operating in the unlimited maneuvering
category?

Limited maneuvering applies when you are operating below feet
AGL or at night or in weather.

Which maneuvering category allows you to make heading changes of up to 60°
either side of course?

Which maneuvering category requires that you maintain a constant heading,
airspeed and altitude?

D-31 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_38.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. There are no restrictions except those of the aircraft flight manual and AFI 11
series operational limits.

2. 5000
3. Restricted

4. Nonmaneuvering

AAM-4 D - 32


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_39.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

In questions | - 8, match the definition to the term below.

1.  _ BENT a. Previous radar contact lost.
2. _ KILL b. — Aircrew will complete the intercept.
3. __ WHAT STATE c. | Request immediate vector to target.
4.  __ SNAP d. Height of friendly aircraft in thousands of feet.
5. __ FADED e. Report amounts of fuel/or armament.
6. —_ ANGELS f. Target altitude is estimated between 10,000
feet AGL and 25,000 feet MSL.
7.  __ MEDIUM
g. Commit on target, cleared to fire.
8. _ JUDY
h. | Request for bearing and range to prebriefed
target.
1. Direction for pilots to prepare for combat.
j. Identified system inoperative.

9. The primary disadvantage of the AWACS is that

the aircraft is too big in a tactical situation.

ECM resistance is degraded.

escort requirements take valuable air assets from the air battle.
it has poor resolution of fighters inside of 10 nm.

ao Tp

E-1 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)
1. Identify GCI/AWACS capabilities and limitations.

2. Identify aircrew/weapons director responsibilities in a GC/AWACS
environment.

3. Match selected brevity code words with their meanings.
4. Identify separation and termination criteria for training.

5. Identify the maneuvering categories for air-to-air training.

AAM-4 B-1


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_40.jpeg:
10. The FACP is at the end of the C? chain and, as such,

there is a long delay between commit and clearance to fire.

is your link with the command authorities.

must patch calls through the CRC to reach the battlefield commander.
has a short range, aerial surveillance radar that will be on the FEBA.

ao TP

11. The TPS 75 radar, in use by some portions of the Tactical Air Control System

(TACS),

a. includes a planar array antenna.

b. is always a fixed, permanent site.

c. is an over the horizon radar used to acquire ballistic missiles.
d. has an excellent low altitude capability.

12. During tactical control, the WD

has few responsibilities since the fighters take over the tactical control.
uses command vectors to guide the fighters to the intercept.

provides fighters with target information and commit objectives.
usually uses a grid reference for getting information to fighters.

ao Tp

13. After hearing the call, “MIDNIGHT, MIDNIGHT,” the flight lead

a. commits his flight on his own authority while making “CONTACT,”
“COMMIT” and “ENGAGED” calls over the radio.

b. contacts other flight leads on frequency to discuss commit priority, since
the GCI site is radio out and cannot help.

c. prepares his flight for night operations.

d. transitions to the broadcast control reference point system.

AAM-4 E-2


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_41.jpeg:
14.

15.

16.

lige

During broadcast control,

the WD provides target and commit specific information to flights.

the WD usually makes BOGEY/BANDIT calls with reference to
BULLSEYE or grid reference.

the WD does not go to tactical or close control unless the fighter demands
it even if the task load permits.

all radio communications reference BULLSEYE.

Fighters may not transit/enter the altitude/altitude block of any adversary unless
the adversary is

ao FP

beyond 10 nm.

within 10 nm but not a factor.

in visual contact.

beyond 10 nm, within 10 nm but not a factor or in visual contact.

The category which cannot be used at night is

ao FP

unlimited.
limited.
restricted.
nonmaneuvering.

Which of the following is not a constraint during limited maneuvering?

©

A defender may react to an attacker with an extension/separation and/or
turn not to exceed 180°.

Attackers engaging each other may turn 180° maximum in an attempt to
shoot each other.

Heading changes of 90° are not allowed below 1000 feet AGL.
Attackers engaging defenders may turn until the defender terminates the
engagement, a kill is achieved or the defender turns 180°.

E-3 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_42.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-4 E-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_43.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

AWACS | Airborne warning and control system
CRC Control and reporting center
CRP Control reporting center

DCA Defensive counter air

EEI Essential elements of information
FACP Forward air control post

FEBA Forward edge of battle area

GCI Ground control intercept

OCA Offensive counter air

ROCC Region operating control centers
ROE Rules of engagement

RTB Return to base

SA Situational awareness

SOCC Sector operating control centers
TACS Tactical air control system

TAF Tactical Air Force

TR Training rules

WD Weapons director

AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_44.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-4 F-2


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_45.jpeg:
Appendix G contains a copy of the brevity list found in AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1,
Attachment 1, dated 21 December 1996, Operational Brevity Words and Terminology.

G-1 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_46.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-4 G-2


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_47.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS
1. Read AFI 11-214, chapters 2, 3 and paragraphs 5-1 and 5-2 of chapter 5.

2. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the End of Text

Quiz.

NOTE

Section H contains a list of Operational Brevity words from AFTTP 3-1 anda
standard communication calls guide.

AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-4 C-2


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

This lesson is your guide to the radar systems available to you in the intercept
environment. It describes GCI and AWACS and the various amounts of information
they provide, and then discusses AFI 11-214 procedures and responsibilities you and
the GCI/AWACS weapons director (WD) need to know to achieve maximum
effectiveness. Next, it discusses the language of GCI, the operational brevity code
system, which allows you to communicate complex ideas with short code words.
Lastly, it discusses the separation and termination criteria and maneuvering categories
used both in practice and real intercepts.

GCI/AWACS CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS

There are several types of ground control intercept (GCI) operations as well as
airborne warning and control system (AWACS). They range from a single manual
radar site to sophisticated automated systems. GCI moves with the battle so that you
always have radar support. As the forward edge of battle area (FEBA) moves, GCI
units are repositioned in a leapfrog fashion with other GCI units or with AWACS
support to provide continuous radar coverage. Figure D-1 shows an example of how
a tactical air control system (TACS), one of the many types of GCI, might operate in a
wartime environment.

ie
aa AWACS

CRP
(CONTROL REPORTING POST) AAM-04-01

Figure D - 1. Tactical Air Control System.

D-1 AAM-4


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_8.jpeg:
GCI operations are the same regardless of whether you are talking to GCI or the
AWACS. They all employ relatively long-range radars to build the “big picture” of
the air-to-air operation. GCI/AWACS is normally the aircrew’s link to the command
authority. Information is passed to and from the command and control authority, and
is used to direct and control aircraft movement depending on the air order of battle.
Since the most effective method of employing fighter aircraft is to optimize the
interface of command and control, our ultimate goal is to make the GCI weapons
director (WD) a “phantom wingman,” as well as a link with the command and control
authority.

In many cases, the WD can sort out friendlies from enemies, has direct contact with
the command authority, and can pass current intelligence and command decisions
rapidly. As you practice intercepts, the WDs are also improving their skills and
training. During mission debriefs it is important that you communicate both problems
and praise in critiquing your intercepts. In this way GCI WDs will get to know when
you are most vulnerable, when you need more information, what type information you
need and what tactics and techniques work best to accomplish the mission.

GCI=s Mission

GCI sites are designed to provide radar surveillance and threat warning over a specific
area. Within this area, GCIs are also tasked to expedite the rendezvous between
fighters and tankers, as well as provide intercept control and monitoring. Stateside,
GCl=s air defense role is to detect and identify aircraft infringing upon U.S. airspace.
This enables the air defense system to intercept and, if required, destroy intruding
aircraft. Overseas GCI roles include assisting in the offensive counter air (OCA)
tasks of sweep and force protection, and in the defensive counter air (DCA) tasks of
force or base protection.

GCI Procedures

AFI 11-214 provides procedures for air-to-air and air-to-surface operations and
training. It is the single source document for all tactical air forces (TAFs) for those
procedures and is supplemented by each command. It also lays out the interface
between the WD and the aircrew. Finally, there is a glossary of terms in the
appendices that are often used in daily contact with GCI. This glossary is extracted
from AFTTP 3-1, Vol 1.

AAM-4 D-2


Text from AAM-4_Ground_Controlled_Intercepts_page_9.jpeg:
GCI/AWACS Comparison

Manual Radars

There are many types of manual radar systems deployed throughout the world using
hardened sites as well as mobile radars. These radars make up the tactical air control
system (TACS), (see Figure D-1,) which is a mobile command and control system.
TACS, due to its flexibility, permits tailoring to large or small scale operation in
varying warfare intensities and is capable of operating close to the forward edge of the
battle area (FEBA). Presently, most ground components of the TACS use the mobile
TPS 75 planar array radar.

GCI sites may be permanent or mobile depending upon the site’s main mission.
Hardened sites are used for defense of our borders, major commands and anywhere
else that permanence is required. Because of their design, hardened sites are limited
to their location and static area of coverage. The mobile units are positioned as
needed for the battle. The most forward TACS component is the forward air control
post (FACP) which is a mobile unit located about 50 miles from the FEBA. The
command authorities will be in the control and reporting center (CRC), about 200
miles from the FEBA.

Manual sites have a practical range of 240 nm. Since radar is line of sight, the
minimum altitude that targets can be seen is dependent upon the type of intervening
terrain.

Manual radar has a beam width of about 1.5°, and some sites only track in azimuth
and range. Azimuth resolution is 3°, and altitude resolution, if available, could be in
error as much as V2000 feet at 100 nm and V3000 feet at 175 nm. Due to the radar’s
500-foot range resolution, the radar is very good at discriminating two targets within
10 nm of each other, and is usually workable to 1 nm. This radar has a built-in delay
or error, which is the result of the radar antenna’s 6 rpm rotation. Each 360° sweep
takes 10 seconds which produces a 2 to 3 nm lag in the target’s positioning, when
called to the fighter.

The FACP is the last link in the command, control and communication (C’) chain.
However, they do have an extensive UHF/VHF/HF link to the command authority.

D-3 AAM-4


