Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

ELECTRONIC WARFARE
EW-1
GENERIC ELECTRONIC ATTACK (EA)

JUNE 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_10.jpeg:
Peak power versus average power has important implications for the
burn-through formula. Peak power (Ppk) is the maximum power output
during transmission time. It is expressed in watts or megawatts.
Average power (Pav), usually expressed in watts, is the peak power
distributed over the pulse recurrence time (PRT) (Figure D-3).

With continuous wave radars/jammers, peak power equals the average
power. They are inherently less sensitive to noise jamming techniques.
The average power of a pulsed radar is determined by the radar’s PRT.
This allows a relatively low peak power jammer to overpower a higher
peak power radar.

PEAK

POWER AVERAGE POWER
(Ppk) ) (Pav)

EW-1-03

Figure D - 3. Power Distribution.

EW-1 D-4


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_11.jpeg:
Frequency coverage also determines the effectiveness of ajammer. Ata
given frequency, the power radiated by a noise jammer varies inversely
with the width of frequency coverage (Figure D-4).

Kb

=
ae
=)
zo
ac
ctw
cs

fe)

a

RADIATED
POWER OUTPUT

PT TT TT TTT TTT TTT tt TT TT TTT TTT ttt

BANDWIDTH BANDWIDTH

EW-1-04

Figure D - 4. Jamming Power Versus Bandwith.

For a given power output a narrow bandwidth can be jammed at a higher
power level, or a wider bandwidth can be covered at a lower intensity.
These concepts are reflected in barrage noise and fixed spot noise
techniques.

D-5 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_12.jpeg:
Barrage Noise

Barrage noise consists of spreading RF energy over a wide band of
frequencies. The purpose of barrage jamming is to defeat a radar with
good frequency agility, or many radars operating on slightly different
frequencies (Figure D-5).

gt BARRAGE gt gt

4 JAMMING

EW-1-05

Figure D - 5. Barrage Noise.

EW-1 D-6


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_13.jpeg:
Fixed Spot Noise

Fixed spot noise is a stationary narrow band of noise. The advantage of
this technique is that all of the jammer’s power is concentrated on a single
frequency (Figure D-6). The main limitation is that a tunable radar can
simply change frequencies and tune away from the noise.

Figure D - 6. Fixed Spot Noise.

D-7 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_14.jpeg:
Swept Spot

Swept spot jamming is similar to spot in that the jammer transmits a
single narrow band of noise. This technique sweeps that spot noise
repeatedly over a wide frequency bandwidth (Figure D-7). The result is
that at any instant, a concentrated jamming signal covers one specific
frequency. The sweeping action ensures that the noise repetitively hits
any radar operating in the jammed frequency bands. If the sweep rate is
as fast as the radar processing cycle, the radar perceives the jamming as
continuous and has to contend with the noise.

Figure D - 7. Swept Spot Jamming.

EW-1 D-8


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_15.jpeg:
Responsive Noise/Sweep Lock-On Jammers

Similar to spot noise, responsive noise selectively transmits the jamming
signal on the radar’s transmitted frequency. This requires a more
sophisticated jammer that can read the victim's radar frequency and
immediately generate a spot noise centered on that frequency. This
technique uses a narrow bandwidth of jamming energy avoiding a waste
of power. This technique has the power advantage of a spot noise jammer,
and can tune quickly enough to jam all but the fastest tuning (frequency
agile) radars.

The major disadvantage of both swept spot and responsive noise jammers
is that only a single frequency can be jammed at one time. The use of
several radars operating on different frequencies generally degrades the
capability of these jammers.

Blinking Noise

This technique involves alternate activation and deactivation of the noise
jamming. A typical blink rate would be one off/on cycle per second.
Blinking is generally used in conjunction with another cooperative
platform, and is therefore a common formation EA defense.

The alternating noise actuation is intended to cause guidance
disturbances due to sequential activation of the victim’s tracking and
home on jam (HOJ) features. The technique is primarily targeted against
radar guided missiles. The intent is to cause a wide miss distance, or
guidance to the centroid of multiple jamming sources away from the
intended targets.

D-9 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_16.jpeg:
DECEPTION JAMMING

Deception jamming occurs when the jammer radiates, reradiates, alters,
absorbs or reflects the radar pulse for the purpose of misleading the
victim’s radar receiver. There are three basic types of deceptive jamming:
range, velocity and angle.

The main feature that differentiates deceptive jamming from pure noise
jamming is the fact that deceptive jammers repeat a replica of the victim’s
radar signal. The deceptive jammer merely takes the victim’s radar
transmission, modifies it slightly and then retransmits that signal back to
the victim. Deception jamming is designed to take advantage of any
weaknesses in target tracking or impact point calculation to maximize the
miss distance or prevent automatic tracking.

To be effective, the retransmitted signal must match all victim radar
characteristics including frequency, pulse recurrence frequency (PRF),
pulse recurrence interval (PRI), pulse width and scan rate. Because of the
need to exactly replicate the victim radar, deception jammers are much
more complex, but they do not require as much power as a noise jammer.

EW-1 D-10


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_17.jpeg:
Range Deception

False Target Generator

A false target generator operates against a pulse radar in search. This
type of range deception technique relies on the knowledge of the victim’s
radar. The more the jammer can predict the radar's characteristics, the
greater the ability to produce false targets to confuse the victim. If PRF
cannot be predicted and frequency is not known, the jammer is limited to
repeating the victim’s transmitted pulse with some built-in delay that is
interpreted by the processor as an additional target return(s). This
technique causes false targets greater in range than the jammer (Figure
D-8). If PRF and frequency can be predicted, random false targets can be
generated by sending pulses ahead of the target echo to be interpreted as
target returns as well as delaying pulses.

B-SCOPE B-SCOPE

FALSE TARGETS

ACTUAL TARGETS

B-SCOPE

PRF NOT KNOWN PRF KNOWN

PRF KNOWN, SIDELOBES KNOWN

EW-1-08

Figure D - 8. False Targets.

If the jammer can detect the victim’s sidelobe, it transmits a pulse that
appears as additional targets in azimuth.

D-11 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_18.jpeg:
Range Gate Stealer (RGS)

A range gate stealer operates against a pulse radar in track. The jammer
usually receives a pulse, amplifies it and retransmits it with a slight
delay. The technique uses amplitude modification to capture the tracking
range gate and by slowly increasing the time delay, causes the victim to
work with false range information or to break lock entirely (Figure D-9).
If the RGS can predict the next pulse, a modern system could run the
range gate in either direction. This is a major vulnerability of a constant
PRF radar.

TARGET
ECHO \ <—— JAMMER PULSE IS STRONGER

THAN TARGET ECHO

DELAY OF JAMMING
PULSE IS INCREASED

RANGE GATE
MOVES OFF TARGET
—_—————>

EW-1-09

Figure D - 9. Range Gate Stealer.

EW-1 D-12


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_19.jpeg:
Angle Deceivers

Modulated Noise

This jammer alters the amplitude of the jamming output at a frequency
that is related to the scan rate of the tracking radar and creates a phase
difference. This generates a false tracking error signal. High energy
appears in the part of the scan pattern that should receive low energy and
the boresight of the antenna biases toward the false signal (Figure D-10).
The resulting “angle walk off’ causes a conical scan radar to lose sight of
the real target.

JAMMER
OUTPUT

AVATAVAT,

MODULATING SIGNAL ECHOES

RADAR | |

EW-1-10

Figure D - 10. Modulated Jamming (Conical Scan).

Cross Polarization

This EA technique causes false angle track in monopulse tracking
systems. The jammer returns the radar signal with a change in
polarization. Since the intensity of the radar energy received in each
antenna quadrant is dependent on polarization angle, the false change in
polarization leads to antenna angle tracking errors.

D-18 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: EA-1, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_20.jpeg:
Velocity (Doppler) Deception

Velocity Gate Stealer (VGS)

Velocity gate stealers attempt to move the tracking gate off the target
return in the same manner a RGS walks the range gate off the target skin
return. Radar systems using a doppler shift for gating a target may be
countered by stealing the velocity gate of the locked-on system. Since
gating the target is in frequency, vice time, a slight frequency shift of the
returned signal with respect to the received signal is used to “steal” or
“shift” the tracked signal. This frequency displacement may be applied in
either an upward or downward direction. By constantly changing the
frequency on a programmed basis, a velocity gate pull-off may be
accomplished. Total pull-off periods of 1-10 seconds are typical for use
against most systems at present. It is quite often preferable to use a
down-frequency pull-off in preference to an up-frequency one since some
CW homing missiles use a drop in doppler to arm or detonate the
warhead.

Doppler Noise Jammers

Doppler noise jammers are essentially deception techniques. To be
effective, the jamming aircraft requires indepth knowledge of the target
radar’s operating characteristics. This EA technique has several
purposes. One is to make detection difficult by producing many doppler
signals distributed about the actual target doppler. The victim’s radar
may interpret the extra doppler signals as multiple targets traveling at
slightly different speeds, and display false targets. Blinking doppler noise,
like ordinary blinking noise, interferes with missile angle tracking in
addition to its effect on doppler processing.

If the noise band is narrow enough and distributed correctly (narrow band
repeater noise - NBRN), velocity bin masking results. NBRN requires
some knowledge of the victim’s doppler processing. Velocity bins are
electronic filters that sample the radar return signal according to doppler
frequency. Target detection takes place by recognizing that one of the
filters has a signal stronger than the other filters. To cause velocity bin
masking, the jammer frequency shifts the pulse during amplification.
When the radar distributes the pulse spectrum in the velocity bins, many
other doppler returns surround the target doppler. Depending on the
individual radar design, the target radar automatically adjusts the
detection thresholds above receiver noise to avoid false detections. Ifthe
threshold rises enough, it prevents detection of the true target return.
The result is a “blank scope” (no returns).

EW-1 D-14


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_21.jpeg:
Sidelobe Jamming

A sidelobe jammer introduces noise or deception through the victim’s
radar sidelobes (Figure D-11). In normal operation, the target radar
filters out the sidelobe echoes so that they are not displayed. False targets
in azimuth or noise strobes may result if the victim’s radar system is
unable to discriminate between energy received through the main beam
and sidelobes. If the victim radar is able to discriminate, the system
attempts to gain out the interfering sidelobe energy thereby reducing
detection effectiveness.

B-SCOPE

NOISE JAMMING
MAIN BEAM AND SIDELOBES

EW-1-11

Figure D - 11. Sidelobe Jamming.

D-15 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_22.jpeg:
Standoff Jamming (SOJ)

Standoff jammers support other assets that may or may not be equipped
with self-screening jamming capability on board. SOJ can be employed
using a variety of jamming techniques, including noise, to mask an
attacking element. Since most radars and radar missiles prefer the strong
noise signal over the actual target return, the SOJ can be very difficult to
differentiate, avoid and/or destroy. SOJ platforms can be aircraft, trucks
or fixed sites.

MECHANICAL COUNTERMEASURES (EXPENDABLES)
Chaff

The purpose of chaff is to present the victims radar with additional false
target returns or decoy the victims tracking circuits from the intended
target. Chaff is composed of strips of fiberglass or aluminum cut to a
specific fraction of radar wavelength. This makes it a very effective
reflector of radar energy. The effectiveness of chaff against doppler radars
depends on several factors. For chaff display in search, winds aloft must
be sufficiently strong to give the chaff a velocity greater than the system
filters set to process out ground returns in search. To be effective against
a doppler radar in track, the chaff must bloom quickly enough to present a
good radar target while still within the velocity gate established for the
target. A pulse radar sees the chaff cloud as it blooms behind the
dispensing aircraft, and usually transfers lock to the chaff. Chaff may
cause radar missiles to fuze prematurely by triggering the missile
proximity fuse when the missile flies through/by the chaff cloud.

The chaff cartridge is the most common delivery mechanism. Each
cartridge dispenses chaff dipoles cut to a specific length to match the
victim radar’s frequency. The chaff must be delivered in quantities that
create a radar cross section larger than the dispensing aircraft. When
delivery is required, a beam aspect provides the best radar cross section
and additional cartridges serve to increase the density of the chaff, but do
not enhance self-protection by increasing the cross section. The dispense
rate must be optimized to give the best chance of survival.

EW-1 D-16


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_23.jpeg:
Decoys

A decoy is an expendable aircraft-like vehicle (powered or glider) launched
from or towed by a penetrating aircraft to provide deception and
saturation of a defense network. Decoys usually are made to be
indistinguishable from the launch aircraft by the addition of corner
reflectors, which provide a radar return similar in intensity to the
penetrating aircraft. Decoys can also be equipped with chaff and
physically small noise jammers to mimic penetrating aircraft EA, or with
repeater jamming to produce a radar return equal to the target aircraft.
By duplicating the speed, altitude and course of a penetrating aircraft, a
deceptive target can be introduced into the enemy’s radar defense system.
This can serve to draw fire away from the real aircraft and degrade enemy
defenses.

Flares

Flares are EA devices designed to counter IR frequency receivers that
depend only on IR energy emitted by a target aircraft. Flares produce a
second heat source that attempts to draw an IR tracking head off of the
primary IR source. The desired result is a wide miss or transfer of missile
lock from the primary target to the flare.

The flare must reach a peak intensity shortly after deployment. Flare rise
time is the time required to meet this peak. Peak intensity rises faster at
lower altitudes than at higher flight levels. The flare burn time varies
with application and is faster at low altitudes. Maneuvering may be
required to effectively utilize flare characteristics.

Lamps

Lamps is a form of IRCM using a high power quartz lamp to confuse the
IR missile guidance. The lamp is blinked at a programmed rate to cause
the missile seeker head to oscillate between the lamp and the actual
aircraft heat source, resulting in a missile steering error.

Masking
Masking is an EA technique using certain design features of the aircraft
to deflect radar returns or diffuse the target IR source. The result of

masking is a reduced radar or IR signature causing a loss of efficiency to
missile tracking systems.

D-17 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_24.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Noise jammers deny the victims capability to measure

pe op

closure.

polarization shift.

range.

return energy wavelength.

Burn-through occurs when

pe op

the return echo is stronger than the jammer’s noise.
the radar goes into home on jam.

antenna oscillation matches jammer frequency.
radar shuts down due to RF saturation.

Which of the following is true of standoff jammers?

a. They can only employ noise techniques.

b. _Itcan be difficult to recognize the jamming source as a standoff
jammer.

c.  Itis easy to determine the jamming is from a standoff jammer.

A range gate stealer operates against a radar.

Doppler tracking techniques are subject to being defeated by

pe op

range gate stealer.
velocity gate stealer.
polarization gate stealer.
no known doppler jammer.

Cross polarization is designed to produce angle tracking errors in

EW-1

tracking systems.


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_25.jpeg:
Chaff may trigger the
through the chaff cloud.

a. HOJ mode

b. velocity gate

c. anti-chaff rejection mode
d. proximity fuse

of a radar missile if the missile flies

EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_26.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. ¢
2. a
3. b
4. pulse
5. b

6. monopulse

7. d

EW-1 D - 20


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_27.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

A disadvantage of barrage noise jamming is that

po op

frequency agile radars cannot be jammed.

its power density is inversely proportional to bandwidth.
it concentrates power on a narrow frequency band.

it jams a number of enemy receivers simultaneously.

The point at which the strength of a radar return exceeds a noise
jamming signal is known as

Boop

A

signal to noise ratio.
point gain.
subclutter visibility.
burn-through.

jammer transmits noise to the victim's radar that

have amplitudes opposite those of the true target return. The
resulting “angle walk off’ causes a con scan radar to lose sight of the
real target.

pe op

modulated noise
blinking noise
standoff
sidelobe

Which of the following is true about chaff?

oF

Chaff is only effective against pulse radars.

Chaff does not affect ground radar sites.

Chaff is no longer a valid EA technique due to the complexity of
modern radars.

Chaff can cause a radar to break lock.

E-1 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_28.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

EW-1 E-2


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_29.jpeg:
CW
EA
EP
ES
EW
FM
HOJ
IR
IRCM
NBRN
Pav
Ppk
PRF
PRI
PRT
RF
RGS
SOJ

VGS

GLOSSARY
Continuous wave
Electronic attack
Electronic protection
Electronic warfare support
Electronic warfare
Frequency modulation
Home on jam
Infrared
Infrared countermeasures
Narrow band repeater noise
Average power
Peak power
Pulse recurrence frequency
Pulse recurrence interval
Pulse recurrence time
Radio frequency
Range gate stealer
Standoff jamming

Velocity gate stealer

EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_3.jpeg:
ELECTRONIC WARFARE

COVER

GENERIC ELECTRONIC ATTACK (EA

INTRODUCTION

This lesson is a basic introduction to the electronic warfare (EW)
environment. It provides a brief review of radar theory and radar
systems. General EA, noise and deception jammers, and expendable
countermeasures are discussed. Be prepared to ask questions.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION sc cee case ans ance cose anus sane aus axis nase aes wane aut ance eau news cents uae risa ou A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........0.eeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. ee eeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oe cecccccceessseeeceessseeecceesseeeceessaeeecesssaaeeecessaeeeseeesaaeeeseesaaaees D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo... ceeseecesaeeceseeeeesaeesesseeeessaeesseneeeeneas E-1
GLOSSARY... eee eccccesseeecsseeeesseeecesacecesaeecssaeesessaeeeesaeesessaeesesaeeeenaees F-1

A-1 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify how the following countermeasures operate:

a. Noise jamming

b. Deception jamming

c. Doppler and other jammers

d. Mechanical (including expendable countermeasures)
REFERENCE

Radar, ECM and ECCM Fundamentals Handbook 1 Jan 92

EW-1 B-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the End of
Text Quiz.

C-1 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

EW-1 C-2


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

Jamming is the radiation or reradiation of signals in such a way as to
interfere with the operation of a victim’s radar. Possible jamming
methods include the transmission of noise (continuous RF energy), the
transmission of a series of pulses or a combination of both. Whatever
method is employed, the purpose of jamming is to create confusion and
deny information, thus degrading an enemy’s offensive and defensive
capabilities.

Electronic attack (EA) is the employment of electronic devices and
techniques for the purpose of destroying or degrading the effectiveness of
an enemy's electronic aids to warfare. EA comes in three primary forms:
noise jamming, deception jamming and mechanical countermeasures.

D-1 EW-1


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_8.jpeg:
NOISE JAMMING

Noise jamming consists of a frequency emitter that is “tuned” to the
victim’s radar frequency, similar to tuning an FM radio. Noise jamming
has the effect of filling radar listening time with RF energy that is of
greater intensity than the returning radar pulse (Figure D-1). The victim
radar is therefore unable to detect the returning radar pulse. This denies
the victim radar the capability to time the returning pulse (range
capability). Noise jamming can take many different forms.

B-SCOPE

NOISE JAMMING "STROBE"

EW-1-01

Figure D- 1. Noise Jammer.

Two features of noise jamming are essential for noise jamming to be
effective. First, the jammer must match or be on the frequency of the
emitter to be jammed. Second, the victim radar must perceive the
jamming as continuous. If the jammer is unsuccessful in either of these
requirements, the jamming will be noneffective.

EW-1 D-2


Text from EW-1_Generic_Electronic_Attack_page_9.jpeg:
Power Distribution and Burn-Through

Since jamming signals are one-way transmissions, they often enjoy a
distinct power advantage over radar reflected energy at longer ranges.
However, when a jammer approaches the victim radar, its jamming power
increases by the square of the distance, whereas the echo power increases
by the fourth power. Assuming the jammer’s available power is less than
that of the victim radar, at some range the echo’s power is greater than
the jammer’s. The jammer can no longer mask the radar return, and
burn-through is achieved (Figure D-2).

BURN-THROUGH

RANGE
—— POWER IN
RADAR ECHO

POWER IN
JAMMER

POWER

| With |
>

Figure D - 2. Burn-Through.

RANGE

EW-1-02

D-3 EW-1


