Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

LANTIRN
LAN-1
IR INTRODUCTION

APRIL 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_10.jpeg:
Table D-1 is a list of common target area objects and their emissivities.
Notice that the emissivities of some common targets, such as concrete and
oil-base painted surfaces, are nearly the same as common backgrounds
(plants, ground, and snow).

(8 to 12 micron range)
Bare moist gomd | 8B
Wood, trees, shrubs, grass, anddesert sand | 90
ee
er
ee a

Table D - 1. Emissivity Table.

The amount of IR energy emitted by an object varies at the fourth power
of the temperature and directly with emissivity. Therefore, the
temperature of an object has a much greater effect on the emitted IR
energy than emissivity. For example, consider a camouflaged aircraft
(emissivity of .94 and 20° C) parked on a snow-packed ramp (emissivity of
.91 and 10° C). The temperature spread causes a much larger difference
in IR energy intensity than the difference in emissivity.

LAN-1 D-4


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_11.jpeg:
Thermal Inertia

Thermal inertia refers to the length of time it takes an object to heat up or
cool down. Large, dense objects like tanks take longer to heat and cool
than smaller, less dense objects, and so are said to have high thermal
inertia. The open framework of a transmission tower gives it low thermal
inertia—it is sensitive to heat loss or gain due to convective transport.

Target Orientation/Aspect

An object’s IR signature may appear different, based on the angle from
which it is approached by the sensor, because some of its surfaces may be
warmer than others. For example, a building’s orientation to the sun
determines which wall receives the most warming from the sun. (In the
northern hemisphere, when the sun is setting, the southwest side of a
building is warmer than its other sides.) An internally heated object, such
as a vehicle, has a hotter spot in the vicinity of its exhaust. When
approached from their warmest aspects, these objects may appear
brighter and larger in an IR sensor display than they would have if
approached from their cooler sides.

Background Clutter

Background objects that have the same IR intensity as a target object can
create thermal background clutter, hindering recognition of target objects.
Battlefield fires and destroyed vehicles (which may include deliberate
attempts to decoy IR weapons) must be expected in combat situations.


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_12.jpeg:
TRANSMISSION OF IR ENERGY

The transmission of IR energy from an object to the sensor is affected by
the range and the existing atmospheric conditions.

Range

An important factor in the transmission of IR energy is the distance
between the sensor and the source. The intensity of IR radiation
transmitted through the atmosphere varies inversely with the square of
the distance it has to travel. Therefore, at twice the distance, the amount
of IR energy received decreases by a factor of four.

Environmental Conditions

Most objects of tactical interest emit in the 8 to 12 micron range at
temperatures of -100° C to +100° C. This IR subregion is called an
“atmospheric window” because atmospheric absorption of IR energy is
slight and minimally affects IR transmission. However there are
conditions that, if severe, can obliterate the IR scene.

Absolute Humidity and Dew Point

As IR energy travels through the atmosphere the distance at which it can
be observed can be reduced by various elements in the atmosphere. The
major components of air (oxygen and nitrogen) do not absorb, scatter, or
emit IR energy. However, other elements (carbon dioxide and water
vapor) absorb IR energy, significantly reducing IR transmission. Absolute
humidity (the total number of water molecules in the air) is the most
restrictive factor in using IR systems and is reported as grams per cubic
centimeter (gm/cm*). The dew point temperature (temperature at which
the air is fully saturated) can be used as an estimated measure of the total
water vapor in the air; i.e., the higher the dew point, the higher the
absolute humidity. Thus, the dew point can be used to determine IR
transmission ranges (the higher the dew point, the higher the absolute
humidity, equals the shorter range). Table D-2 gives examples of dew
points and their respective approximate IR visibilities.

LAN-1 D-6


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_13.jpeg:
Dew Point (° F) Approximate IR Ranges (nm)

Table D - 2. Dew Point Versus IR Ranges.

Relative Humidity

Relative humidity is the ratio of the amount of water vapor in the air at a
specific temperature compared to the maximum amount the air can hold
at that temperature. In other words, while absolute humidity is the total
number of water molecules, relative humidity is a ratio relative to the
maximum possible at that temperature.

Precipitation

When visible moisture is in the air (e.g., rain, snow, or dense fog), both
absorption and scattering of IR wavelength energy increases and
transmission is decreased. When the ground is soaked by rain or covered
with snow, there is little thermal contrast between turn points/target and
backgrounds. This results in a washed out NAV FLIR image.

At low viewing angles, snow reflects the sky temperature and appears
dark on an IR display. Under cloudy skies at low altitude, snow reflects
warm clouds which emit absorbed solar radiation. Snow appears light
under this condition.


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_14.jpeg:
Clouds

Dense fog and clouds impact the IR scene in several ways. They are
opaque to IR energy, and virtually eliminate its transmission from an
object to a sensor. Clouds block the sun, and reduce solar loading on
targets and backgrounds. This reduces )T between nonoperating targets
and their backgrounds.

Low clouds have a greater effect on the thermal contrast than middle or
high clouds during the day. Cloud coverage in excess of eight-tenths of the
sky has a dramatic impact on the blackbody temperature of targets and
backgrounds. Cloud coverages of less than six-tenths have relatively little
effect. Rapidly changing scattered-to-broken-cloud cover causes a high
degree of variability in the target thermal scene. However, trees seem
insensitive to any amount of low clouds.

Middle clouds have a similar, although less pronounced effect on
blackbody temperatures. Thin, high clouds have virtually no effect on the
blackbody temperature of targets and backgrounds. Thick, high clouds
have a slightly greater effect, but do not approach that of low and middle
clouds.

For operating (internally heated) targets, cloud coverage may increase )T
by keeping the background cooler than it would be on a clear day.

Cloud cover at night tends to reduce the radiative cooling, which reduces
overall thermal contrast.

Haze And Smoke

Normally, light traveling through haze is scattered by the dust particles,
resulting in restricted visibility. However, since infrared waves are longer
than visible light waves they travel through haze without scattering. This
makes it possible to see through dry haze and smoke with an IR sensor.
(Smoke may be a problem if it is thick enough, and IR opaque smokes are
being developed for camouflage purposes.)

LAN-1 D-8


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_15.jpeg:
Wind

Thermal contrast can be reduced by surface winds. The amount of
reduction in delta T is dependent on wind speed and the terrain. The
stronger the wind and flatter the terrain, the more it affects thermal
contrast. Further, objects with less mass are more sensitive to the effects
of wind than more massive objects. For example, it takes less wind to cool
a thin radio tower on flat terrain to the same IR level as the background
than it does a large building in mountainous terrain.

Diurnal Cycle

For all objects exposed to the sun, solar heating begins at sunrise, and
cooling begins after midday. After sunset, objects cool to near the air
temperature. During this diurnal cycle, objects heat and cool at different
rates, based on their density and surface composition.

The times when the temperature difference between target objects and
their backgrounds becomes zero is called thermal crossover. Crossover
occurs most frequently during morning and evening (Figure D-3), but can
occur at various times, depending on materials and weather conditions.
During crossover, a target object may be indistinguishable from its
background to IR sensors.

20

GRASS,TREE,

15 LEAVES

DEGREES
ABOVE NONOPERATING
AIR TEMP 10 ARMORED

TARGET,

6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 22 23
TIME OF DAY (24-HR CLOCK)

LAN-01-03
Figure D - 3. Diurnal Cycle.

D-9 LAN-1


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_16.jpeg:
TACTICAL DECISION AID

Introduction

The tactical decision aid (TDA) is a computer program used by weather

forecasters to assist you in predicting how the IR scene will appear, and to

determine maximum acquisition and lock on ranges. The product of this

program can be modified to suit local commanders. You will see a sample

of it in the next IR lesson.

The program uses three different models for its computation:

e The target contract model estimates thermal contrast ()T) between
the target and background. (Delta T is determined by comparing the

equivalent blackbody temperature of any two items.)

e The atmospheric transmission model predicts how well target
contrast will be transmitted through the atmosphere.

e The sensor performance model describes how well a sensor works
over a specific portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, compares
that to the target’s signal, and yields acquisition ranges and turn
points.

Input Data

The pilot or WSO is responsible for providing information to the weather

forecaster for use in the TDA. During combat, Intelligence may also

provide certain information such as use of obscurants or site activity. The
information needed by the weather shop is of three different types.

Mission Information

e Date and time of the mission

e The times over navigation points and targets

e Type of IR sensors used

LAN-1 D-10


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_17.jpeg:
Tactics Information

Altitudes
Headings
Aim points

Ingress, employment, and egress tactics

Target and Background Information

Target composition - color, thickness, and condition of the exterior,
and construction materials

Target location data - latitude, longitude, elevation, and orientation
Target operations state - whether engines are running or not running

General target data - Is it heated, or does it generate heat? Are there
areas that stand out as hot spots (smoke stacks, cooling towers)?
Conspicuous cold spots (air conditioning ducts, metal roofs, settling
ponds)? Is the target camouflaged in any way?

Background information includes type of vegetation, soil type and
characteristics, roads or other landmarks that can obscure the target,
bodies of water in the vicinity of the target, and background smoke
direction

Include a photo of target and area, if possible


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_18.jpeg:
Output Data

TDA output data is modifiable, but usually includes

e =a hot-to-cold list with )Ts,

@ an indication of the level of atmospheric transmissivity, and
e IR detection, laser, and lock on ranges.

At most bases supporting IR users, a generic TDA is put out by the
weather shop. It covers the local low levels and ranges, and requires no
input by the aircrew. Ifa special low level or target is required, the
aircrew involved must provide the weather shop with the information
previously discussed if they want a TDA forecast for their mission.

TDA Limitations

e Limited number of target and background models - a target from the
TDA menu having similar characteristics to your target may need to
be substituted.

e = Less than five knots of wind is not considered.

e Forecasting the difference between 7/10 and 10/10 cloud coverage is
difficult, yet it is in this region that the amount of clouds have the
greatest impact on thermal contrasts. A small cloud forecast error
equals a large forecast )T error.

e Strict security is needed on target and tactics information.

LAN-1 D-12


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_19.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
The intensity of IR emission is primarily dependent upon the object’s

low thermal inertia.

temperature.

mass and distance from the reflector.
reflectivity and atmospheric conditions.

Boop

IR sensors can virtually “see through”

a. precipitation.

b. clouds.

c. background clutter.
d. haze.

The single most restrictive factor in using IR systems is

a. high relative humidity.
b. high absolute humidity.
c. background clutter.

d. diffuse solar radiation.

What are the three types of input data the aircrew must supply to
weather for the TDA?


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in
the left margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: LAN-1, July, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_20.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. b
2. d
3. b

4. Mission data, tactics data, and target/background data

LAN-1 D-14


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_21.jpeg:
FLIR

IR

NAV

hm

TDA

GLOSSARY
Celsius
Fahrenheit
Forward looking infrared
Infrared
Navigation
Nautical miles

Tactical decision aid

LAN-1


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_22.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET

LAN-1 F-2


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_3.jpeg:
LANTIRN

C
a O
\f_ err ta H

COVER

IR INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

This workbook introduces the principles and application of infrared energy
in low level navigation. It discusses the electromagnetic spectrum and the
various factors that impact the visibility of a target via IR sensors. It also
introduces the function of the tactical decision aid (TDA). As part of a
computer-based training (CBT) lesson, this workbook should be read prior
to taking the CBT instruction.

CONTENTS:

INTRODDUGCTION 6 ces cuss sss sess sen sens sews suns sues sure sens set sews sues sur seins sen seis sess sumn axes « A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........000eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eecccccceessseecceesseeeecessseeeceessseeeecesssseeeseeessaeeeseessaeeeseeeeaaeeseeea D-1
SONOS RII “Me tly Me) Medel see see ees es sec ante es se ane cea tame see ese ap ee te se: ce N/A
GLOSSARY. ieee eeccceeseeesscecssneeecesaeeceseecessaeeceseecessaeesesaaeeeesaeeeesnaeeeseas F-1


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the impact of target and background characteristics on IR
detectability.

2. Identify the impact of environmental characteristics on IR energy
transmission.

3. Identify the basic inputs and outputs of the tactical decision aid
(TDA).

LAN-1 B-1


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE THE CBT LESSON

Study the information contained in this workbook.


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

LAN-1 C-2


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INFRARED (IR) PRINCIPLES
Introduction

Radiated and reflected infrared energy is used by F-15E systems for
navigation, targeting, and terminally-guided weapons systems.
Knowledge of infrared energy principles allows you to understand the
dynamics of IR sensor employment.

IR equipment works by detecting and displaying thermal contrast, called
delta T ()T), in the field of view. How well a target stands out against its
background is dependent on many factors, as depicted in Figure D-1.

“I a TEMPERATURE
TARGET SURFACE
fo BACKGROUND COMPOSITION
EMISSIVITY
\ |
DENSITY
a SURFACE AREA
- SIZE
RANGE——_”
— BACKGROUND
CLUTTER
ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS
- HUMIDITY / DEWPOINT
- PRECIPITATION
- CLOUDS DIURNAL
- SMOKE / HAZE ATTACK sun CYCLE
iis AXIS ANGLE

LAN-01-01

Figure D - 1. IR Detection — Thermal Contrast Factors.


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_8.jpeg:
The Nature of IR Energy

To understand how radiated energy is used in F-15E navigation and
weapons systems, let us begin by reviewing the spectrum of known
electromagnetic radiation ranges (Figure D-2). The longest wavelengths
are the low frequency radio waves starting at the left of the chart, and the
shortest are high frequency gamma rays, shown at the far right.

The expanded detail section of the chart, which includes the IR region,
shows the various subregions of this spectrum used by the NAV and
weapon guidance systems you will study. The wavelengths in the IR
region range from .72 to 1000 microns.

ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVE SPECTRUM
MICROWAVES

ELECTRO-OPTIC
SPECTRUM

LANTIRN

PAVE TACK

IR MAVERICK AIM-9

8-12 oN 3-5 Nv

1 000,, ony

MICROWAVES EXTREME IR F on NEAR] VISIBLE |ULTRAVIOLET] X- >
« IR LIGHT

=> =
z

20,8
agaws4q
Arar lao
ro>-~omes

LAN-01-02

Figure D - 2. Electromagnetic Spectrum.

IR waves, which travel in straight lines outward from the source, are
invisible to the human eye. However, IR detection may be thought of as
“visual” detection using a specialized type of “eye,” which sees at a
different frequency than the human eye. To do this, IR energy is
gathered, focused, and changed into electrical signals through specialized
lenses, prisms, and mirrors. IR vision has problems similar to human
vision, in that objects may be obscured by weather conditions, other
objects, or lack of contrast (such as a green object on a green background).

LAN-1 D-2


Text from LAN-1_IR_Introduction_page_9.jpeg:
TARGET/BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS
IR Intensity

All objects above absolute zero (0° Kelvin, or -459° F, or -273° C) radiate
IR energy. The intensity of radiated IR energy is basically determined by
an object’s absolute temperature and emissivity.

Temperature

An object’s temperature can be increased by internal heating, such as an
engine in an armored vehicle, or a furnace in a building, or it can be
increased externally by the sun on clear days, or by diffused solar
radiation on overcast days. Objects may also be warmed by conduction of
heat from adjacent warmer surfaces, or cooled by convection; e.g.,
exposure to wind.

Emissivity

Emissivity is defined as the ratio of radiation intensity from a specific
surface to the radiation intensity of the same wavelength from a
blackbody at the same temperature. (A blackbody is a theoretically
perfect absorber of all incident IR radiation.) All other factors (including
object temperature) being equal, an object with high emissivity appears
brighter on an IR display than an object with low emissivity.

Objects reflect and absorb external heat in varying degrees. These
variations are caused, for the most part, by differences in surface
composition. Rough surfaces absorb more heat than smooth surfaces. At
the same absolute temperature, objects that are rougher and less
reflective are capable of emitting more IR energy than objects that are
smooth and highly reflective.


