Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-AIR RADAR
RDR-4
AAI/EID EMPLOY MENT

AUGUST 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_10.jpeg:
AAI/Radar Compatible Modes

All radar search and track modes are compatible with AAI, except narrow
(six-bar/15°) TWS, guns search and velocity search. AAI is operative and the
appropriate reply symbology will be displayed with the radar in STBY or
SNIFF (but only if interrogation is performed in noncorrelated fashion). AAI
reply symbology will also be displayed on the A/G radar display. When the
radar is functioning in the A/G RBM mode, interrogations are performed in
the correct code mode, regardless of UFC settings, thus deleting any
requirement for correlation. AAI is also functional with weight-on-wheels.

UFC/AAI INTERFACE
UFC AAI/EID Submenus

For the purpose of this text, the mechanics of the AAI/EID submenus are
almost identical. Aircrew HOTAS switchology will determine whether an
interrogation sequence is based on the AAI submenu settings or EID
submenu settings. The direction the aircrew moves the interrogation switch
will determine which settings are used (AAI or EID).

RDR-4 D-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_11.jpeg:
UFC Menu 1

The modes selected for interrogating on both the AAI and EID submenus are
displayed on Menu 1 at PB #8 (Figure D-1) with the A and/or E followed by
the modes selected for interrogation. If the number of selected modes results
in more characters than can normally be displayed, the legend at PB #3 (IFF)
is shortened to just “I.” If the AAI/EID are slaved to the IFF, “S” is displayed
as the last character. (More about slaving later in this text.)

SELECTED MODES
SLAVING SELECTED

LAW 1000° STR 16.1C

ITCN 112X A/P OFF

IFF1234 A1234/E1234S

(TF NORM N-F NORM

|_| | U285.000G U340.000x

Ey

B
3 vol
SS=
E
6
J
Z
. : c
9
J) J J
q => (7 » 7
EMIS
u

RDR-04-01

UFC MENU 1 - AAI / EID SELECTED MODES

[)

Figure D - 1.

D-5 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_12.jpeg:
With an appropriate scratchpad entry the selected modes/codes can be
changed via PB #8. Acceptable entries are mode (or mode and N or C) or
mode, dash and code (or mode, dash and code followed by N or C). AAI/EID
slaving can be activated by entering “S” at PB #8.

During an interrogation, more specific information concerning the progress of
the interrogation is displayed as AAI or EID followed by the mode-code and

C or N (Figure D-2).

LAW 1000’

STR 16.1C

ITCN 112X

AIP OFF

IFF123C4

AAI 2-7777C

_| (Tf NORM

N-F NORM

_| [U285.000G

U340.000x

x C17

® IGREC
C/M
°©Ors

™—®

gia

UFC MENU 1 - INTERROGATIONS IN PROGRESS

RDR-4

Figure D - 2.

CYCLES THROUGH MODES AS
INTERROGATIONS PERFORMED

POSSIBLE INDICATIONS:

AAI 1-##C
AAI 1-###N
AAI 2-4##H#C
AAI 2-7#HHEN
AAI 3-44#H#C
AAI 3-7#HHEN
AAI 4AC
AAI 4AN
AAI 4BC

AAI 4BN

AAI 4ABC
AAI 4ABN

EID 1-##C
EID 1-###N
EID 2-##HHIC
EID 2-#HHHIN
EID 3-7HHHIC
EID 3-#44#IN
EID 4AC
EID 4AN
EID 4BC
EID 4BN
EID 4ABC
EID 4ABN

RDR-04-02


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_13.jpeg:
The AAI submenu (Figure D-3, left) is selected from UFC Menu 1. The EID
submenu (Figure D-3, right) can only be selected from the AAI submenu
(PB #8). Returning to the AAI submenu from the EID submenu requires
returning to Menu 1. The selections on the UFC AAI and EID submenus
determine what combinations of modes/codes will be interrogated at HOTAS
(FCP or RCP) activation, whether the interrogation (for modes 1 thru 3) will
be for mode only (N) or mode and correct code (C), and how many radar
sweeps (2 or 4 at PB #9) will be utilized to interrogate each selected mode.

BARS 20R4
AUTO ID
M4A (NOR C) OFF
M4B (N OR C) SIT
M4AB (N OR C) a

|x M1-42N_ -AAI-
x M2-1234C

xX M3-4321N
a

U285.000G U340.000x L

AAI SUBMENU EID SUBMENU

RDR-04-03

Figure D - 3.

D-7 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_14.jpeg:
The modes to be utilized during an interrogation sequence are alternately
selected (asterisk)/deselected (no asterisk) by depressing the appropriate push
button. The codes and N (for interrogating mode only) or C (for interrogating
mode and correct code) are selected via scratchpad entry as is selecting codes
A, B or AB for mode 4. The code and/or N or C can be entered separately (i.e.,
11 or C) or together (i.e., 11C, AN, BC, etc.). Changes (either to the AAI/EID
submenu or through UFC Menu 1) cannot be input while an interrogation is
in progress. A mode 4 interrogation uses the mode 4 codes (A, B, or AB)
keyed into the IFF mode 4 system (door 3R) by maintenance personnel. Mode
4A is the current day’s mode 4 code; 4B is the next day’s code. 4B (or 4AB)
should normally only be interrogated after midnight Zulu to prevent
compromising the next day’s codes. If the mode 4 is not keyed (has been
dumped or zeroed) then there is no mode 4 interrogation capability because
mode 4 interrogations are always performed as correct code (regardless of the
N or C displayed on the UFC adjacent to the mode 4 legend). The mode 4
switches on the FCP left console have no effect on the AAI system (except
zeroing the mode 4 codes, which prevents mode 4 interrogation replies from
being evaluated by the IRE).

Toggling PB #9 on the AAI or EID submenus alternately selects 2 or 4. Each
selected mode will be interrogated for the number of radar sweeps selected (2
or 4).

The AUTO ID feature on the AAI or EID submenu cycles among the following
options:

@ OFF - AUTO ID feature is off.
@ STT - AUTO ID feature is active when the radar enters STT.

@ PDT - AUTO ID feature is active when the radar enters a track mode,
including STT, DTWS, DTT.

@ AUTO ID-EID (on the AAI submenu) or AUTO ID-AAT (on the EID
submenu) signifies that AUTO ID is active, but the selections on the other
submenu will be utilized, when the AUTO ID feature initiates an
interrogation sequence.

The AUTO ID feature automatically starts an interrogation sequence (with
no further aircrew action required), cycling through all selected modes when
the radar enters STT (AUTO ID-STT), or track (AUTO ID-PDT), and the STT
target or PDT does not already have a valid interrogation ID associated with
it. In other words, the target has not been ID’d since current track on it was

RDR-4 D-8


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_15.jpeg:
achieved. AUTO ID-PDT includes radar entry to STT. When an
interrogation sequence is commanded by the AUTO ID feature, it is the same
that would be commanded by a manual interrogation via aircrew HOTAS
action to initiate the AAI or the EID programmed sequence. The AUTO ID
feature is not applicable in the Highlight radar mode. For this purpose,
Highlight is treated as a search, vice track mode.

INTERROGATE SWITCHES

The FCP coolie switch on the right throttle (right multifunction switch)
(Figure D-4) is used to manually start or stop interrogations. Outboard
deflection interfaces with selections on the UFC AAI submenu, while inboard
deflection interfaces with selections on the UFC EID submenu. Command of
the radar is not required.

AAI INTERROGATE

(OUTBOARD)
EID INTERROGATE A/| SELECTION
(INBOARD) (OUTBOARD TWICE

WITHIN 1 SECOND)

FCP THROTTLES RDR-04-04

Figure D - 4.

D-9 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_16.jpeg:
The RCP interrogate switch (Figure D-5) on the right hand controller is used
to start or stop interrogating. Forward deflection interfaces with selections
on the UFC AAI submenu, while aft deflection interfaces with selections on
the UFC EID submenu. Command of the radar is not required.

EID INTERROGATE (AFT)

AAI INTERROGATE (FWD)

A/| SELECTION (FWD TWICE
WITHIN 1 SECOND)

CO

RCP RIGHT HAND CONTROLLER RDR-04-05

Figure D - 5.

RDR-4 D-10


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_17.jpeg:
An interrogation sequence is initiated with switch deflection (FCP or RCP),
while there is no interrogation in progress. If the switch is held for less than
1 second, the interrogation sequence stops when the switch is released. If the
switch is held for longer than 1 second, the interrogation sequence is latched
and continues until each mode selected on the appropriate UFC AAI or EID
submenu has been interrogated for the selected number of radar sweeps.
Given that the modes are selected, the interrogation sequence follows the
order: mode 4 first, mode 1, mode 2 and then mode 3.

The interrogation sequence stops when any of the following occur.

@ All selected modes have been interrogated (each for the selected number of
radar sweeps).

@ The crew member initiating the interrogation stops the interrogation by
deflecting the cockpit switch for greater than 1 second while an
interrogation is in progress. The pilot cannot stop a WSO-initiated
interrogation and vice versa. Kither crew member can stop an AUTO ID
initiated interrogation. The interrogation switch can be deflected in either
direction. (An AAI deflection will stop an EID interrogation and vice
versa.)

@ Ifthe radar isin STT or DTT, the interrogation sequence stops once the
radar STT or DTT target is correlated with a friendly interrogation reply.
(Important concept!)

An AAT interrogation sequence cannot be initiated while an EID
interrogation is in progress and vice versa. Changes to the interrogation
parameters through the UFC cannot be made while an interrogation is in
progress. If the aircrew stops an interrogation sequence, the next
interrogation begins at the beginning of the UFC programmed sequence, not
where the previous interrogation was stopped.

D-11 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_18.jpeg:
RADAR/HUD INTERROGATION CUES
Radar and HUD Cues

A circle (high confidence mode 4 reply) or diamond (low confidence mode 4 or
a mode 1, 2, 3 reply) can be displayed on the HUD and radar (A/A radar
display or A/G radar display). The determinator of high confidence/low
confidence for the mode 4 reply is, in simplified terms, a threshold ratio of
total interrogation pulses versus valid replies.

HUD Cues

In the A/A, NAV and INST master modes and with the radar in a track mode,
interrogation reply symbology (circle or diamond) is displayed in the HUD TD
box commensurate with the last valid ID of the STT or current PDT (Figure
D-6). The ID symbology appears where the TD box is commanded,
independent of whether the TD box is actually being displayed. For example
in GUNS track when the TD box and gun sight are coincident, the TD box is
removed, but the interrogation reply symbology is still displayed. The circle
or diamond is displayed while the interrogation sequence is in progress plus a
few seconds of overrun after the sequence is complete. The overrun is usually
2 - 5 seconds depending on what track mode the radar is in.

TD BOX

CORRELATED STT
OR PDT (O OR©&

16-2 16L

HUD TD BOX WITH AAI REPLY RDR-04-06

Figure D - 6.

RDR-4 D-12


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_19.jpeg:
A/A RDR Cues

During an AAI/KID interrogation sequence, an interrogation in-progress cue
consisting of “AAT” or “EID” followed by the mode currently being
interrogated and N (for normal) or C (for correct code) is displayed just above
the BIT window (for example AAI 3N or EID 2C) (Figure D-7).

AAI OR EID AND
- MODE AND N ORC

F
L
[e)
[e)
—d D
= :
— Cc
D
|_|
A (ALL) ==
OR —
| (INTERROGATE)

RDR-04-07

Figure D - 7.

Deflection of the AAI interrogation switch twice within 1 second will change
the first BIT window character between “A” and “IT” to influence the
requirement for correlation (Figure D-7). In STT/DTT, only the “T” will be
displayed (STT always requires that the interrogation reply be correlated
with the STT target). If a “C” is associated with any mode (on the UFC) the
“T’ or “A” has no meaning and the interrogation, for that mode, will not
require correlation with a radar target (except when the radar is in
STT/DTT). For those modes with an “N” assigned on the UFC, including
mode 4, the “I” will impose the requirement for correlation, while the “A” will
delete the requirement for correlation (again except in STT/DTT).

D-13 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: RDR-4, July 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_20.jpeg:
As the system receives valid responses to interrogations (including a
threshold level of the number of valid reply pulses) and correlation (if
required), reply symbology (circles or diamonds) is displayed (Figure D-8).

RADAR TARGET SYMBOLOGY

REGULAR SEARCH:
|

HOT / COLD SEARCH:

AVY

VECTORED TRACK FILES:

T

SECONDARY DESIGNATED TARGET:

PRIMARY DESIGNATED TARGET:

Ww

7

INITIAL STT TRACK:

ESTABLISHED STT TRACK:

7

RDR-4

AAI SYMBOLOGY AAI SYMBOLOGY
(CORRELATED WITH (NO CORRELATION WITH
RADAR TARGET) RADAR TARGET)
o> @ COO
> @ > 0

~? “°
° 9 OO

MIPPLEYy WITH: <> O o> oO
ie Sle f ? Oo Oo
STEADY AAI OR
MIPPLES7 WITH: <> O OO
STEADY AAI OR
Mey CTE f ? o> O
RDR-04-08
Figure D - 8.
D-14


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_21.jpeg:
If correlation is not required (and not accomplished), the reply symbology (an
open circle or diamond) is displayed at the range and azimuth of the replying
aircraft. Range is determined by the IRE alone, azimuth is determined by a
radar/IRE interface. If correlation is not required, but is achieved, the
correlated reply symbology is displayed at the radar target location (azimuth
and range). If correlation is required, only correlated reply symbology will be
displayed.

If during the same interrogation sequence a valid reply is followed by a valid
reply for another mode, the new symbology will replace the old, until replaced
by another valid reply, or until the interrogation is complete. For example, a
high confidence mode 4 reply symbol (circle) would be replaced by a mode 1, 2
or 3 reply symbol (diamond). A diamond replacing a diamond actually occurs,
but may not be discernable to the aircrew.

For search targets, correlated replies replace the radar target only for the
remainder of the duration of the interrogation sequence. In STT, the reply
symbology replaces (or more likely mipples with) the STT target symbol for
about 5 seconds. An important point is that in STT or DTT, and only in STT
or DTT, once correlation is achieved, the interrogation sequence stops. If you
were to have the radar in STT or DTT and attempted to interrogate your
leader’s mode 1 discrete correct code, the system would never look at mode 1
if it kept getting a correlated mode 4 reply. With all friendly aircraft
squawking mode 4, interrogating in STT or DTT would never provide you
with the discriminator that the STT or DTT target was indeed your leader.

In TWS, uncorrelated replies and replies correlated with search targets are
displayed as previously discussed. The PDT symbol mipples with the
correlated interrogation reply symbol for the duration of the interrogation
sequence plus 2 seconds overrun. In DTWS the interrogation sequence does
not stop with a correlated reply (like STT or DTT) but rather continues
through the UFC selected sequence. SDT symbols are replaced by reply
symbols for as long as they remain SDTs.

D-15 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_22.jpeg:
In STT, DTT and DTWS, the current ID status of the STT target or PDT is
displayed in the radar upper left corner, below the bearing/range information
and to the left of the target track data (TAS, aspect, heading) as a circle or
diamond. If the PDT is stepped to an SDT, which is already correlated with
an interrogation reply, the new PDT symbol mipples with its current ID
symbol and the upper left corner of the radar displays the new PDT ID
status. If the new PDT is not correlated with an interrogation reply, the
AUTO ID process (if selected) will initiate an interrogation sequence (or the
aircrew can manually initiate an interrogation sequence).

If a radar target is correlated with an interrogation reply (in other words it
has a current interrogation ID), placing the radar acquisition symbol over the
radar target symbol will recall the ID. (The ID symbol will replace or mipple
with the radar target as long as the acquisition symbol is coincident with the
radar target.)

EMPLOYMENT CONSIDERATIONS

The AAI/EID system seems complicated, more so than it really is, largely
because it provides so much flexibility in the cockpit.

Consider the following points:

@ Plan and brief how the system is to be used during a sortie. The Air
Tasking Order (ATO) for combat or a combat exercise will likely be very
specific on what is required from the system before a target can be
declared hostile and ordnance can be employed. Generally some other
criteria besides AAI will be required. Obviously, we would not shoot
circles or diamonds, but generally the absence of circles/diamonds plus
some other measure(s) (TEWS information, “Bandit” declaration by GCI,
etc.) would be required to shoot. A common set-up technique is to use the
AAT for station keeping (i.e., looking for codes within your flight/package),
and EID for lack of friendly.

@ During a trail departure/systems check, interrogate the preceding

aircraft’s IFF squawks to ensure both his IFF and your AAI are working.
It is best to interrogate the squawks one at a time and in correct code.

RDR-4 D-16


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_23.jpeg:
@ Ifyou have multiple modes selected for interrogating, consider selecting
only 2 bars. With all 4 AAI modes and 4 bars selected, the radar would
have to sweep 16 times to complete the interrogation sequence. In 120°
sweep (70°/sec scan rate), this would require almost 30 seconds. (With a
head aspect target and 1200 knots closure, the fighter-to-target range has
decreased by 10 miles). Two-bars per mode would cut the time in half.
STT or a narrower azimuth sweep will also reduce the time required to
complete an entire sequence. (Remember, in STT the interrogation
sequence stops with the first correlated reply.)

@ Ifyou are looking for a particular discrete squawk (correct code) consider
selecting just that mode. With multiple modes selected, it is often difficult
to tell which mode is giving you the reply symbology. Obviously, a circle is
a high confidence mode 4. But a diamond could be a mode 1, 2, 3 or low
confidence mode 4. Particularly in narrow sweep and two-bar
interrogation, the modes are interrogated quickly and it is often difficult
to match the reply with the information in the BIT window. In STT, the
interrogation is very fast. Each mode in 2-bar takes about 1.3 seconds.
The UFC and radar readouts for the mode currently being interrogated
change too fast to be useful.

@ The system not only helps you discriminate friendly from enemy or one
friendly from another friendly, but in the uncorrelated mode it also helps
you find the range and azimuth of a replying aircraft, so that you can use
a narrower azimuth scan and just concentrate on elevation to obtain a
radar target. You probably cannot overuse the system.

@ In STT or DTT, once the system correlates a valid reply with the radar
target, interrogation stops. If you were interrogating to get a mode 1
reply (probably correct code) to positively ID your flight lead and the STT
aircraft was replying to your mode 4 interrogation, you would never obtain
the desired mode 1 reply. In STT or DTT, even more than in other radar
modes, it is probably best to interrogate only the one mode if you are
looking for a discrete reply.

D-17 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_24.jpeg:
@ As you and your crewmate manipulate the interrogate switches, it is easy
to inadvertently change the A/I logic. Check the BIT window frequently
during interrogation sequences to ensure the appropriate A or I is
selected.

@ As well as the other purposes we have discussed, use AAI/EID for “see and
avoid.” For example, on a low level route, you could set the AAI to
interrogate mode 3-4000C (special use airspace military traffic) and the
EID to interrogate mode 3-1200C (VFR traffic; and special-use airspace
military traffic who forgot to change their squawk from M3-1200 to
M3-4000).

@ The AAI system has a big correlation window, and provides no correlation
in altitude/elevation. Just because the radar symbology shows an
interrogation reply symbol is correlated with a particular radar target, it
does not mean that the radar target and the replying aircraft are
definitely the same. It just means that they might be. Multiple
interrogations, from the time an intercept begins until just prior to
employing ordnance reduces the likelihood of a big mistake. Over time,
the aircraft providing the false ID would likely move out of the correlation
window. It is important to remember the absence or presence of
interrogation replies for a single interrogation does not complete the task.

Slaving

Slaving the AAI and EID settings to the current IFF settings is accomplished
by a scratchpad entry (“S”) into AAI (PB #8) on UFC Menu 1 or toggling AAT
SLV (PB #7) on the IFF submenu. Slaving can only be deselected on the IFF
submenu. When slaving is selected, “S” follows the selected AAI modes
displayed on UFC Menu 1. When slaving is selected, each time the IFF
system changes to a new phase (IFF phasing), both the AAI and EID (modes
1 through 3) change to mimic the IFF (which modes are selected and the
codes associated with modes 1 and 3). Slaving does not affect mode 4 and
does not affect the mode 2 code, only whether mode 2 is selected or
deselected. When slaving is selected, an aircrew manual change to the IFF
(modes 1 through 3) causes the AAI and EID selections to mimic the changes
made to the IFF. When an IFF change (phasing or manually) is implemented
to the AAI/EID system, it changes the affected mode to correct code (C). If
the aircrew desires mode-only interrogation [(N) for modes 1 through 3] or
correlated-only interrogation [(N) for modes 1 through 4], the AAI/EID
settings would have to be reset following the change (phasing or manual).
Hence, although slaving has value in some situations, the aircrew must
realize the impacts.

RDR-4 D-18


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_25.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ
Mode 4 interrogation

never requires correlation with a radar target.

always requires correlation with a radar target.

requires correlation with a radar target only in STT/DTT.

can be correlated or noncorrelated (if the radar is not in
STT/DTT) dependent on UFC AAI/EID submenu selections (N
or C).

po op

Which of the following is true concerning correlated versus
noncorrelated interrogation?

a STT never requires correlation.

b. STT always requires correlation.

c. STT correlation requirements are dictated by UFC AAI/EID
submenu settings and whether A or I is displayed in the radar
BIT window.

d. STT correlation requirements are dependent on whether modes
1 through 3 or mode 4 is being interrogated.

UFC AAT/EID bar settings are 2 or 4 (for modes 1 through 4) and

a. determine the number of radar frames the system will
interrogate each selected mode.

b. determine the number of radar sweeps the system will
interrogate each selected mode.

c. are not used during AUTO ID (PDT or STT) interrogation (the
IRE S1/S2 settings are used instead).

d. are used only in correct code interrogation.

E-1 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_26.jpeg:
4. Concerning the AUTO ID feature,

a. separate settings can be simultaneously selected on the
AAI/EID submenus (i.e. AUTO ID-PDT on one submenu and
AUTO ID-STT on the other).

. AUTO ID can only be mechanized to the AAI submenu settings.

c. with AUTO ID-PDT or SDT selected on one submenu (AAI or
EID), the other submenu will show AUTO ID-OFF.

d. with AUTO ID-PDT selected the system will perform an
automatic interrogation when the radar enters STT.

5.  Ifan interrogation sequence is terminated by the aircrew prior to its
completion, the next interrogation sequence

a. begins where the previously terminated one ended.

b. begins at the beginning of the UFC selected sequence.

c. will always begin with mode 4, even if mode 4 is not selected on
the UFC.

6. With the radar in STT, the radar interrogation in-progress cue will

display

a. AATor EID followed by the current mode and N or C.
b. AAT or EID followed by the current mode and code.

c. AAT or EID followed by STT.

d. AUTOIDSTT.

RDR-4 E-2


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_27.jpeg:
7. While using the A/G radar display, you wish to use the AAI to check
your spacing on the preceding aircraft of a trail formation. You must

a.

b.

return to the A/A radar; you cannot use the A/G radar for this
task.

ensure that your UFC AAI/EID code setting(s) match the IFF
code(s) of the interrogated aircraft.

perform your interrogation in normal, with I selected in the
radar BIT window.

use mode 4, as it is the only mode that is displayed on the A/G
radar.

E-3 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_28.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-4 E-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_29.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

AAI Air-to-air interrogator

ATO Air tasking order

DTT Dual target track

DTWS Designated track-while-scan
EID Enhanced identification

HOTAS Hands on throttle and stick

HPRF High pulse repetition frequency
IRE IFF reply evaluator

KIR Interrogator computer

LRU Line replaceable unit

MPRF Medium pulse repetition frequency
PDT Primary designated target

R/T Receiver/transmitter

STT Single target track

TWS Track-while-scan

UFC Upfront control

F-1 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-AIR RADAR

COVER

AAIT/EID EMPLOYMENT
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying the F-15E AAT set, including
selecting options on the UFC, FCP HOTAS/RCP hand controller
switchology, interrogation in-progress cues displayed on the UFC and
radar display, and interrogation reply cues displayed on the radar and
HUD.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eecccsssecesseecesneeecesaeecesaneccesaeesessaeesesaeesesaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.0... eeeeeeees C-1
TEXT oc eccceccceesseeecesssneeeceesseeeccessseeeceesseeeecesssseeeseeseaaeseseessaeeeseees D-1
END OE TEXT QUIZ sess ses sess sows sues suns sire seve ese ones suns sues suns seis ens ae sews sues sur au E-1
GLOSSARY. eeccceesceceesneeeesseeecssacecesaeeessaeecesaaeeessaeeeeeaeesesaeeeeeaeeees F-1

A-1 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)
1. Identify the operating characteristics of the AAI system, including:
a. Normal (N) and Correct Code (C) interrogation
b. Correlated and noncorrelated interrogation.

2. Identify aircrew actions required to program the UFC AAI/EID
selections.

3. Identify the FCP HOTAS/RCP handcontroller switchology to
start/stop interrogations and to select the All (A) and Interrogate (I)

interrogation modes.

4. Identify the radar interrogation in-progress cues and the radar/HUD
interrogation reply symbology.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 AIR-TO-AIR INTERROGATOR (AAT) SET

RDR-4 B-1


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the quiz.

C-1 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-4 C-2


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

The F-15 air-to-air interrogator (AAI) set hardware is largely unchanged
since the Eagle’s inception. However, due to software changes, AAI system
capabilities have evolved significantly over the years. The current F-15E AAI
system software (and radar software) provides significantly improved
flexibility and ease of use/interpretation.

However, the overall system still exhibits characteristics and anomalies,
which, if not fully understood by the user, can adversely affect results and
aircrew interpretation. The consequences could range from rejoining on the
wrong aircraft to fratriciding a friendly aircraft in combat.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

The aircrew utilizes the UFC to select how the interrogation is to be
implemented, and switchology (both A/A radar and AAI) to influence the
conduct of the interrogation. The progress of the interrogation is displayed
on the UFC and A/A radar and the results are displayed on the A/A or A/G
radar and the HUD. The AAI provides the radar with interrogation
information and the radar is responsible for processing the AAI hardware
inputs, so that they are visually displayed to the aircrew (on the radar
display and HUD).

AAI Components

The IFF reply evaluator (IRE) is the main unit of the system. It is located on
the right side of the aircraft’s nose (in door 3R). It provides generation of
interrogations (based on aircrew selections), reply evaluation and radar
interface functions. The radar provides the IRE with information required to
produce interrogation and process replies, including radar mode, scan rates
and antenna azimuth position. The IRE monitors AAI system failures and
LRU (line replaceable unit) status and provides inputs to the aircraft BIT
system.

The IFF interrogator receiver/transmitter (R/T) is also located in door 3R. It
contains a power select switch, which is a holdover from previous versions.
(The R/T represents the only significant hardware change). The F-15E R/T
always uses maximum power, regardless of the switch setting. There are two
separate receivers.

D-1 RDR-4


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_8.jpeg:
The Interrogator Computer (KIR) produces mode 4 interrogations, decodes
mode 4 replies and determines their validity. It is also located in door 3R.

The AAI dipole array is part of the radar antenna, composed of ten L-band
dipoles mounted on the antenna face and cabling/hardware on the back of the
main radar antenna.

OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS
Normal (N) Versus Correct Code (C) Interrogations

Whether interrogation is normal or correct code is determined by aircrew
selections on the UFC (an N or C adjacent to the selected mode/code on the
AAI/EID submenus), and whether the interrogation is for modes 1 thru 3 or
for mode 4. For modes 1 thru 3, the aircrew can determine, through the UFC
selection, whether only replies that are correct in both mode and code will be
displayed on the radar (C), or whether mode replies will be displayed, even if
the code does not match the UFC code setting (N). For mode 4, the N or C
next to mode 4 on the UFC has no meaning with respect to normal or correct
code interrogation; mode 4 always requires a correct code (4 A or 4 B) reply,
or the reply symbology will not be displayed. The mode 4 selection of N or C
does have meaning, however, with respect to correlated versus noncorrelated
interrogation.

Correlated Versus Noncorrelated Interrogation

The aircrew can select to have interrogation replies displayed on the radar
that are not correlated with a radar target (symbol). The advantage of this
method of interrogation is that it provides the azimuth and range of aircraft
that might be of interest to the aircrew. The aircrew can then manipulate
the radar (azimuth scan volume, PRF, altitude coverage, etc.) to obtain the
corresponding radar target. Alternatively, the aircrew can select to have
interrogation replies displayed on the radar only if they are correlated with a
radar target (symbol). The advantage of this method of interrogation is that
the aircrew is not encumbered by replies outside the area of interest being
searched by the radar. For example, an aircrew flying at 500 feet may not be
interested in aircraft flying at 50,000 feet. The aircrew can select, via FCP
HOTAS/RCP hand controller switchology whether an I (Interrogate) or an A
(All) is displayed as the first character in the radar BIT window, while an
interrogation is in progress. By selecting “A” in the radar BIT window, the
aircrew deletes the requirement for correlation for all interrogation modes
with “N” selected on the UFC. By selecting “I” in the radar BIT window, the
aircrew imposes the requirement for correlation for all interrogation modes

RDR-4 D-2


Text from RDR-4_AAI_EID_Employment_page_9.jpeg:
with “N” selected on the UFC. All modes with “C” selected on the UFC do not
require correlation, regardless of the “A/I” setting displayed in the radar BIT
window. However, STT or DTT always require correlation with the STT or
PDT target, regardless of the UFC “N or C” setting. During interrogations
with the radar in STT or DTT, the radar BIT window will only display “I”
regardless of aircrew actions.

If an interrogation reply cannot be correlated with a radar target and the
aircrew selections require correlation (or the radar is in STT or DTT), the
reply symbology will not be displayed. Even if the aircrew has selected that
interrogation reply symbology be displayed without correlation with a radar
target, the system will correlate (and show correlated symbology) if able, but
will also display uncorrelated reply symbology.

Correlation Window

When correlation with a radar target is required for radar display of
interrogation reply symbology, the correlation requirements are normally +4°
(but possibly as much as +8°) in azimuth and +2 nm in range (for a HPRF
target) or +8000 feet in range (for a MPRF target). There is no correlation
requirement in elevation. Incidentally, although interrogation reply symbols
will be displayed only within the current radar display range and the
azimuth limits of the current radar sweep, the elevation capability of the AAI
dipole antennas is much larger than the elevation coverage of the radar’s
main antenna. The dipole antennas cover a 35° cone centered on the radar
main antenna elevation. For example, in six-bar RWS at 25 nm the radar
altitude coverage is 20,000 feet, but the AAI coverage is about 87,500 feet. If
correlation is not required, the interrogation replies from aircraft well outside
the normal radar altitude coverage will be displayed. Regardless of whether
correlation is required or not, a valid reply from an aircraft well above or
below a radar target (but meeting range and azimuth correlation
requirements) will be correlated with that radar target.

Although the radar and IRE work together to determine the azimuth of the
interrogation reply, the IRE alone determines the range of the reply and
neither the radar nor the IRE assesses the altitude. Again, even though the
aircrew has made selections that delete the requirement for correlation, if the
radar/IRE determine the interrogation reply meets the range/azimuth
correlation criteria with a target in radar memory, they will perform the
correlation and the aircrew will view correlated symbology on the air-to-air
radar. Because the correlation window is so large, it is commonly referred to
as the “correlation phone booth” and the aircrew must be keenly aware that
replies from one aircraft can be correlated with a different radar target.

D-3 RDR-4


