Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND RADAR
AGR-1
A/GROUND RADAR INTRODUCTION

JANUARY 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_10.jpeg:
Figure D-2 shows three targets (A, B, and C) with approximate beam
widths.

Target A is separated from target B by 3000 feet and target B is separated
from target C by 6000 feet.

80 NM

40 NM

y ' 2.5° BEAM WIDTH
(EFFECTIVELY 1.25°)

AGR-01-02

Figure D - 2. Azimuth Resolution.

At a range of 80 nm only one target is displayed on the radar scope
(10,600'). At a range of 40 nm, targets A and B are displayed as one
target (5,300' wide), but target C is displayed separately. At a range of
20 nm all three targets are displayed separately (each 2650' wide).

AGR-1 D-4


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_11.jpeg:
Pulse Length Error (PLE)

All radar transmissions have a definite pulse length which induces errors
in range. PLE is caused by the time difference between the leading and
trailing edges of the pulse striking an object and returning to the radar
(Figure D-3). This error is one-half the actual length of the transmitted
pulse. Thus, for any given pulse, it is always a constant value regardless
of range. PLE adds length to the far side of a reflecting object or it adds
length to the near side of a nonreflecting no-show area (e.g., a lake). PLE
adds error to the entire area of distortion caused by BWE.

ews EDGE OF PULSE
— J LEADING EDGE OF PULSE

RADAR ANTENNA |

V4 LEADING EDGE OF PULSE
o—/. ( <—— TRAILING EDGE OF PULSE

RADAR ANTENNA

AGR-01-03

Figure D - 3. Pulse Length Error (RBM).

D-5 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_12.jpeg:
Range resolution is a function of pulse length. For a radar to resolve
(display separately) two targets in range, their range separation must be
such that the trailing edge of the pulse will have departed the near target
before the leading edge of the echo from the far target returns to the near
target. Thus, two targets must be separated by at least one-half the pulse
length, regardless of target range from the radar, to be displayed
separately.

Although pulse length error (for a given pulse length) is constant
regardless of range from the target, the actual radar pulse length of the
APG-70 varies as you change radar scope ranges. The range resolution
cells for the various radar scope ranges of the F-15E are as follows:

Radar Scope Range Range Resolution

(nm) (feet)

4.7 59

10.0 127

20.0 253

40.0 507

80.0 1014

160.0 2028

One additional constraint on resolution is the digital nature of radar
processing. This constraint applies to both pulsed and doppler radar
processing. No matter how close a target, how narrow a beam, how short
a pulse, or how small a display range or map size, with current processing
capability, the absolute best APG-70 resolution achievable is 8.45 feet (in
the HRM patch map mode).

AGR-1 D-6


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_13.jpeg:
BWE and PLE combine to make the return larger than the target’s true
size (Figure D-4). BWE error is reduced as range to the target decreases.
PLE is constant for a given display range. To minimize the effects of these
errors (again, only present in the RBM radar mode) use the center leading
edge of the radar return as the center of the object, and use the smallest
possible radar display range.

TARGET TARGET PLE

TARGET

AGR-01-04

Figure D - 4. BWE and PLE Combined (RBM).

D-7 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_14.jpeg:
Mechanized Resolution Versus Target Breakout

Although beam width and pulse length determine the azimuth and range
resolution cells respectively for a pulse radar, a radar (pulse or doppler) is
frequently unable to display two targets as discrete returns because of
display limitations. If two point targets are separated by the minimum
resolution cell size, the radar display will indicate two adjacent targets,
which will appear as one target to the aircrew. You will have to decrease
your radar scope range or get closer to the targets before they are
displayed separately. As a guide, targets separated by two to three times
the resolution cell size should normally be displayed as discrete targets.

The F-15E radar display is separated into many small picture elements
called “pixels.” More specifically, the display is subdivided into 480 X 480
pixels, or a total of 230,400 picture elements, with each element having a
length and width limitation based on radar range. For example, when
using the 10 nm radar range each pixel equates to an area of 127 square
feet. This means that any object the radar “sees” will be displayed as at
least a 127 X 127 foot return, even if the radar can determine it to be
smaller. This is referred to as mechanical resolution, and it is present in
all modes of the APG-70 radar. See the chart below for pixel size based on
the selected radar display range, or display window size for HRM patch
maps in the F-15E.

Range Scale Pixel Size

(nm) (feet)

4.7 59

10.0 127
20.0 253
40.0 507
80.0 1014
160.0 2028

To recap, RBM resolution is limited by BWE (range to target), PLE
(display range), mechanical resolution/spot size error (display range) and
digital processing constraints. HRM resolution is limited by PLE as well,
although the error can be mitigated by selecting a smaller display range.
HRM resolution is also limited by mechanical resolution and digital
processing constraints.

AGR-1 D-8


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_15.jpeg:
UNCONTROLLABLE FACTORS

Uncontrollable factors are things you cannot control, but still affect the
radar display. They are the characteristics of topographic and cultural
features; size, shape and composition of the objects; the relationship of
objects to one another; and unusual returns.

Topographic Features

One of the most important ways an air-to-ground radar presents
information is through contrasts between rough and smooth surfaces.
Smooth surfaces on the ground appear as blank areas of no return on the
display; in contrast, rough areas appear as bright returns. A smooth
surface, such as a calm sea, reflects radar energy away from the receiving
antenna; a rough surface, such as a rugged mountain, scatters radar
energy in all directions. Some of this energy is reflected to the radar
receiver and displayed as bright images of varying intensity on the radar
display (Figure D-5). The exception is a radar altimeter which radiates
basically straight down and operates very well over calm seas.

AGR-01-05

Figure D - 5. Rough Terrain.

D-9 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_16.jpeg:
Mountains are excellent reflectors of radar energy. The steeper the
mountain near side gradient, the greater the energy returned to the radar
receiver. The near side of the mountain produces a bright return, with a
shadow (no-show area) behind it. The shadow is caused by the radar
energy being blocked from reaching the back side of the mountain and the
area adjacent to the back side of the mountain. Remember, radar waves
travel in a straight line, line of sight fashion. Rolling or flat terrain
produces uniform returns and little or no shadows. Understanding bright
returns on the radar display is important, but understanding terrain
shadowing, particularly at low altitude, is equally important. Mountain
shadows lengthen as aircraft altitude decreases and/or when range to the
mountain increases. Analysis of unique peak and shadow combinations
helps identify points of interest. Also, shadows can be used to monitor
terrain clearance and provide a good cross-check when accomplishing
terrain following radar (TFR) operations. If the aircraft is well above a
given peak, little or no shadowing appears. If the aircraft is above the
peak, the shadow converges behind the return (Figure D-6, A). Ifthe
aircraft is below the peak, the shadow diverges behind the return and
extends the full length of the scope (Figure D-6, B).

wort T>

i La ee

B pas b

US 3sec Mpe
240-055

by

| RBM | MAP | 3.3 | FULL Vicmt

- - La —
240-055
| vl
RBM | MAP | 3.3 | FULL | IGMT

am YOUOIO!

AGR-01-06

AGR-1 D-10


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_17.jpeg:
This divergence can be hard to see, so use caution and consider shadows
running parallel to the edges of the return, or shadows that extend the
length of the radar display as equally dangerous.

At very low altitudes even a small knoll may cast a long shadow. This

vertical development produces bright returns and deep shadows at low
level. The key is ensuring you receive ground returns past the obstacle
before getting too close. If you do not, you may be below the obstacle.

Cultural Features

Cultural features (Figure D-7) generally produce good returns, primarily
due to their composition and steep vertical development. Large cities
provide excellent returns, but may be too large for precise navigation
unless specific sections of the city can be distinguished from others; i.e.,
industrial complexes and commercial areas. Suburbs and small towns can
be hard to detect, particularly in mountainous areas. Many small cities
and towns are often laid out in cardinal headings, so approaching the
target from one of these directions should help target acquisition. A small
town that may not show on a 225° heading might show well on a heading
of 270°. Large military airfields are usually located away from large
cities, and the aircraft, hangars, etc., give good contrast to the flat
(no-show) runway and ramp areas.

AGR-01-07

Figure D - 7. Cultural Terrain Features.

D-11 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_18.jpeg:
In RBM, railroads and highways often do not show well, but the built-up
areas along them may show the trend of their routes. At very low
altitude, railway and highway embankments can be identified at short
range over flat terrain if you choose an axis of flight 90° to the
embankment. Marshaling yards produce good return signals if a number
of tracks and cars are concentrated in a small area.

Large steel bridges are excellent reflectors at low altitude, particularly
when seen against a water background and approached at right angles.
Small bridges are usually lost in the ground clutter. Wharves, piers, and
breakwaters show well against a water background (no-show) and make
excellent low level radar navigation checkpoints.

Land/water contrast provides good information for low level radar
navigation. Islands and shorelines produce brighter returns, and are
contrasted against the no-show area of the water. Choose this type of
return when possible, since it is easily identifiable at low level and
remains recognizable through a large range of tilt and gain settings.
Although rough seas can cause returns on the display from the choppy
surface, the returns are weak in comparison to land returns and there is
little possibility of confusing them.

At low level in mountainous areas, the no-show area of a lake is often
hidden by mountain shadows. To avoid this problem, choose another axis
of attack or altitude in preflight planning. En route, reduce the gain and
look for a bright return on the far shore of the lake, with a no-show area
on the near side. The no-show areas of rivers and lakes approached at
right angles appear similar to their depiction on the map. Small rivers
often disappear in the ground clutter.

AGR-1 D-12


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_19.jpeg:
Target Size

The larger the reflective area scanned by the radar beam, the more energy
reflected back to the radar system. It is easier to detect a large industrial
complex on radar than it is to detect an individual building. As seen in
Figure D-8, any cultural or terrain feature that extends above the surface
reflects more energy than flat terrain. The amount of energy reflected
depends upon the width and height of the object (surface area). For
example, assume targets A and B are of the same material and at the
same range from the antenna; and target B is twice the size of target A.
This means object B intercepts and returns twice the amount of radar
energy as object A.

AGR-01-08

Figure D - 8. Target Size.

D-13 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGR-1, July, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_20.jpeg:
Target Shape

Shape plays a role in determining the amount of energy returned. Most
structures in cultural areas are rectangular or square in shape and
present good reflecting surfaces. The amount of energy reflected back to
the antenna varies with the angular reference to the radar beam
(Figure D-9).

AGR-01-09

Figure D - 9. Same Size - Different Axis.

AGR-1 D-14


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_21.jpeg:
In Figure D-10, building A presents a reflecting surface at a right angle to
the radar beam; most of the energy (about two-thirds) is directed back
toward the antenna. Building B reflects most of the energy away from the
antenna.

AGR-01-10

Figure D - 10. Different Shaped Buildings.

D-15 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_22.jpeg:
In Figure D-11, the building acts as a “corner reflector” and reflects
maximum energy back to the antenna. The principle involved is similar to
tossing a rubber ball into a corner. The ball returns in the same path
from which it was thrown. The ideal reflective shape would be an “L”
shaped building, with the attack axis going into the interior corner formed
by the “L.”

AGR-01-11

Figure D - 11. Corner Reflector.

AGR-1 D-16


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_23.jpeg:
Individual cylindrical storage tanks scatter more energy than they reflect.
As shown in Figure D-12, both concave and convex surfaces scatter radar
energy. Only about one-third of the energy is returned to the radar.

AGR-01-12

Figure D - 12. Round Building/Surfaces.

D-17 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_24.jpeg:
Long narrow objects that are parallel to the beam intercept comparatively
small amounts of radar energy. If the object is perpendicular to the beam,
it intercepts more radar energy (Figure D-13).

AGR-01-13

Figure D - 18. Long/Narrow Shapes.

AGR-1 D-18


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_25.jpeg:
Target Composition

An object’s structural material is an important factor in determining its
capability for reflecting radar energy. Although size is the primary
determinant of the amount of radar energy intercepted, surface
composition governs the amount of energy an object reflects. In general,
the denser the structural material, the better its reflective qualities.
Figure D-14 shows comparative densities and, therefore, reflectivity of
some materials. Less dense materials such as vegetation tend to absorb
and diffuse radar energy. If you can determine the structural material of
an object, you can predict its relative brightness on the display.

STEEL | ,

ALUMINUM

ADOBE

EARTH

wooo [If

Figure D - 14. Reflective Potential.

AGR-01-14

D-19 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_26.jpeg:
Target Relationships

Relationships between objects definitely affect radar display
presentations. Small objects close together tend to increase reflections
and produce a brighter single return (Figure D-15). If these objects were
isolated, they might not show on the display, due to their small size, and
in any event would not produce individual radar returns until a closer
range was achieved.

AGR-01-15

Figure D - 15. Small Objects Close Together.

Unusual Returns

Sometimes radar returns are observed which appear to be unusual. These
are caused by weather, climatic conditions, jamming, and cardinal effect.

A few weather conditions (sufficient quantities of moisture droplets or ice
crystals) reflect radar energy and cause returns to appear on the radar
display. Fully developed thunderstorms create bright returns and have
shadows behind them similar to mountain returns.

To positively identify a thunderstorm use the RBM mode and raise the

antenna tilt until the ground returns disappear and weather returns
remain on the display.

AGR-1 D - 20


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_27.jpeg:
In extremely cold areas, a reverse effect may be encountered where land
appears as water and water as land. The jagged edges of pack ice along
frozen shorelines produce good returns. The smooth, level condition of
inland snow appears as a no-show area. Frozen lakes are affected in the
same manner, appearing as islands in a no-show area.

Cardinal effect and glitter are related. When the radar beam strikes a
large number of similarly oriented buildings at or near 90°, a large
amount of energy is reflected back, giving an unusually large return on
the radar display. The larger than normal return remains on the display
as long as the radar beam is scanning at or near right angles to the group
of reflective surfaces; e.g., drive-in theater screens (this is sometimes
called the “glitter effect” because of its nonpersistent nature).

Conclusion

Though uncontrollable factors cannot be changed by aviators, their effects
on radar presentations must be understood. The ability to predict
reflected energy intensity from objects is an important factor in successful
mission planning and radar interpretation. Although uncontrollable,
these factors may be compensated for, to some degree. For example, if
objects are isolated or made of low density (low reflectivity) material,
perhaps they should be eliminated from consideration as points of
interest. In some cases, the axis of attack can be varied to enhance the
radar returns.

D-21 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_28.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. BWE jis applicable in

a. RBM.

b. HRM PPI.

c. HRM patch map.
d. BCN.

2. Pulse length error and beam width error

are combined to make the return longer in length only.
cancel each other out.

are both added in azimuth only to make the return larger.
are added together to increase return total size.

po op

3. Ifyou cannot determine a mountain shadow’s divergence, but it runs
the length of the scope, you should assume that you are
the mountain.

a. above

b. below

c. atthe same altitude as
d. abeam

4. Though size is the primary factor determining how much energy is
intercepted, one factor that governs the percentage of energy
reflected is

a. surface composition.
b. BWE.

c. PLE.

d.

gain and display brightness.

AGR-1 D - 22


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_29.jpeg:
Which of the following aspects of a building serves as the best radar
energy reflector?

Any side of a square building

The points of a triangular building

The inner corner of an “L” shaped building
The center of a round building

Boop

D - 23 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND RADAR

COVER

A/G RADAR INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying air-to-ground radar basics for use
in F-15E radar navigation. It familiarizes you with inherent errors,
controllable and uncontrollable factors, doppler and synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) effects on high resolution map (HRM) principles, and radar
interpretation.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeecceesseeeesneeceseeeeesaeecesaeeeessaeeessaeeessaeesessaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeseeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
CEE os ses sans sos cores nos nas ois cua cares canis ans as RSA SNS Onis aU KUNE kK NewS SHES KoRKG MU NaS HSS aUD KR D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ ou. ececcccesseeecesneeceesaeecesacesensaeecesaeeseseeeenaees E-1
(ina) F-1

A-1 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_30.jpeg:
ANSWERS

l. a
2. d
3. b
4. a
5. Cc

AGR-1 D - 24


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_31.jpeg:
CONTROLLABLE FACTORS

Aircrew controllable factors include range, altitude, antenna tilt, attack
axis, and receiver gain. These factors and how they are used to best
display various returns are briefly discussed in the following section.
Remember, some of these controllable factors can be utilized to maximize
the positive aspects and/or minimize the negative aspects of some of the
uncontrollable factors.

Range

Range affects the intensity of reflected radar energy received at the radar
antenna. The intensity is inversely proportional to the range of the
aircraft from the reflecting surface.

Altitude

Altitude affects line of sight to the horizon (the amount of world in front of
you that can be seen) and target reflectivity (influenced by the angle of
incidence between the radar beam and the target). Increased altitudes
allow a larger area to be covered by the radar beam, thus making large
terrain features (mountains, for example) more discernable. Smaller/
similar terrain features tend to blend in with their surroundings.
Conversely, decreased altitude produces smaller area coverage by the
radar beam. At lower altitudes smaller features are more discernable, as
shown in Figure D-16.

ee =
AREA COVERED AREA COVERED

AGR-01-16

Figure D - 16. Altitude Effect.

D - 25 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_32.jpeg:
Tilt

The area covered by the beam is also directly affected by the angle of the
radar relative to the horizon (tilt angle). Elevation control (tilt) changes
the graze angle of the radar. Assuming altitude remains constant, the
larger the tilt angle, the less area covered (Figure D-17). At the shallow
graze angles associated with F-15E missions, the major portion of the
RBM range scale is illuminated. At steeper graze angles, the pencil beam
limits illumination in range. For example, at a 20° graze angle, only 10%
of the range scale will contain video, and the illuminated portion shrinks
as the graze angle increases. Use elevation control to illuminate the
desired area. When entering RBM, the radar attempts to position the
antenna elevation to illuminate the selected range scale. If unable, the
radar points the antenna to illuminate the far top portion of the video.
The aircrew can manually position the antenna elevation (in RBM) if the
automatic adjustment is not optimum.

ANTENNA TILT

ANTENNA TILT

ee)
AREA COVERED

AREA COVERED

AGR-01-17

Figure D - 17. Graze Angle.

Attack Axis

Attack axis also determines the angle of incidence between the radar
beam and the reflecting surface. The best returns are obtained when the
approach heading to the object is perpendicular to its largest reflecting
surface. However, this is not always possible in combat. Therefore, as the
attack axis departs from the perpendicular, the return may appear
smaller than anticipated, or may not be discernable at all.

AGR-1 D - 26


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_33.jpeg:
Gain

Radar gain controls the intensity of the returns through the receiver and
therefore, the intensity of the returns on the radar display. Gain is
controlled automatically in HRM. RBM has four aircrew selectable gain
levels. High gain settings produce maximum land/water contrast.
Medium settings eliminate weaker signals and are used to differentiate
man-made features (towns or bright spots) from surrounding terrain. Low
gain is used when only the stronger returns are desired. Also, low gain is
normally used to refine aiming once the point has been identified
(pinpoint targets).

PRINCIPLES OF HIGH RESOLUTION MAP (HRM) RADAR
Introduction

Throughout this section, the terms synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and
high resolution map (HRM) radar are used. In simple terms, the F-15E’s
APG-70 uses SAR principles to produce HRM video on a cockpit display
(monochromatic only). The radar uses SAR principles to produce video
with a resolution capability many times that achievable with real beam
map (RBM) mode. Resolution is the minimum distance two objects may
be separated and still be discerned as individual objects rather than one
large object. At 20 nm, HRM provides resolution as good as 17 feet as
compared to 2650 feet for RBM at 20 nm. Alternately, HRM provides a
given resolution capability at much greater ranges from an object than
does RBM. For example, RBM resolution at 10 nm (1300 feet) can be
achieved at 80 nm by HRM (1016 feet).

Antenna Size

One factor affecting resolution capability is the size of the antenna. The
larger the antenna, the better the resolution capability. The F-15E radar
“synthesizes” an antenna that is approximately 1400 feet long. It does so
by taking many “snapshots” as the aircraft (and antenna) moves across
the ground, rather than a single “snapshot” by a large antenna. It
actually simulates a 1400 foot long linear array of small antennas. Each
of these “snapshots” is taken at a slightly different perspective (range and
angle) to the objects within the radar’s field of view. So, information is
gathered by the SAR and stored in computer memory. This information is
then processed by the central computer (CC) to produce high resolution
patch maps.

D-27 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_34.jpeg:
As previously stated, the radar’s antenna position relative to an object on
the ground changes between each “snapshot.” Range is determined by
measuring the time between transmission of a pulse and reception of the
object echo (as with any pulsed radar). Azimuth is determined by doppler
shift (change in frequency and rate of change in frequency). The doppler
effect is a shift in the frequency of a wave reflected by an object in motion.
In the case of an A/G radar, doppler shifts are produced by the motion of
the radar relative to the objects from which the radar’s radio waves are
reflected. If the distance between the radar and a reflecting object is
decreasing, the waves are compressed. Their wavelength is shortened and
their frequency is increased. This is reversed if the distance between the
radar and the object is increasing. In other words, radiated waves are
compressed in the direction of motion and spread out in the opposite
direction. The greater the speed, the greater the effect. The wave is
unaffected only at right angles to the motion. For example, as a train
comes toward you, you can hear a change in the sound of the train’s horn.
This is due to the sound wave being compressed as the train moves toward
you. The rate of change in the sound also increases as the train gets
closer and as the angle between you and the relative motion of the train
approaches 90°. After passing 90°, the sound of the train’s horn wanes.
This is caused by the sound waves expanding instead of being compressed.
Like the train’s horn, doppler frequencies change due to range rate
(relative velocity of the radar) and the angular relationship between the
radar and the object on the ground.

The highest angular resolution that can be obtained through doppler
processing occurs when the combination of doppler frequency and angular
rate of change is optimized. This occurs when the object concerned is 60°
relative bearing from the aircraft.

The information gathered by SAR and stored by the CC is used to
precisely determine the relationship of objects. This information is then
used to construct an extremely accurate scene (the high resolution patch
map) to be displayed.

AGR-1 D - 28


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_35.jpeg:
Factors Affecting HRM Capability
Azimuth

The rate of change of doppler shift directly off the aircraft’s nose is small.
Although HRM is possible within this area, processing time required
makes it impractical for F-15E application. As a result the APG-70 has a
blind zone +8° of the velocity vector. In the blind zone, the computer will
not allow construction of patch maps nor allow HRM PPI video to be
displayed.

For good radar processing, you should position the target as close as
possible to the optimum; that is, as far from the nose as you can.

Figure D-18 shows the effects of angular displacement. The greater the
look angle (also called squint angle), the smaller the resulting map error
will be.

Velocity

Accurate velocities are crucial in HRM because errors in aircraft velocity
cause errors in calculating doppler shift. Therefore, to improve HRM
capability, a feature has been incorporated to update computer velocities
in the mission navigator (CC subprogram). This capability is achieved
from using air-to-ground radar velocities and is called precision velocity
update (PVU). You will learn more about this capability in follow-on
lessons. Figure D-18 illustrates how critical accurate velocities are.
Inaccurate velocities can degrade the quality of the HRM as well as induce
inaccuracies in position. With inaccurate ownship velocities, the relative
location of HRM-displayed geographic features (and therefore the derived
coordinates of the features) are incorrectly computed. Additionally, once
the HRM video is created, the CC’s understanding of where the map
features are relative to the aircraft, over time, is a function of system drift.
Accurate aircraft velocity, via a PVU, make the initial computations more
accurate and decrease the rate of system drift.

D - 29 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_36.jpeg:
1000.

800.

600.

ERROR (FT)

400.

200.

0. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60.
SQUINT ANGLE (DEG)

-—-—-— 1KT VELOCITY ERROR
0.5 KT VELOCITY ERROR

AGR-01-18

Figure D - 18. Velocity Errors Degrade Accuracy.

For example, a one knot velocity error in the system is about 1.7 feet of
drift error each second. If you made a map at 10 nm and then attacked
the target at 500 KTAS, the target would “drift” about 120 feet by the
time you got there (70 seconds ETE). Additionally, with a one knot
velocity error, if you made a map with a 20° squint angle, you would have
a map position error of about 350 feet (Figure D-18). The cumulative
effects of a one knot velocity error could be as much as 470 feet. If you did
a velocity update first that reduced the error to one-half knot, the drift
error would only be 60 feet and the map position error slightly less than
200 feet. Your map/attack would be considerably more accurate. In
actual practice, PVUs provide velocities that are significantly more
accurate than 1 knot (.1-.2 knots).

AGR-1 D - 30


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_37.jpeg:
Range

The velocity errors discussed previously result in an angular error in
measurement on the HRM map. The greater the range, the larger the
error in feet. Therefore, HRM patch map capability and results are
improved at closer ranges. Azimuth error is, in fact, directly proportional
to range.

Aircraft Speed

At higher aircraft speeds the angular movement and doppler frequency
shift are both greater. Remember that large antenna array are created by
moving the APG-70 antenna through the air. Hypothetically, the faster
the antenna moves, the larger the synthetic antenna created.

Maneuvering Flight

In measuring doppler shift, the computer processors compensate for
aircraft movement when maneuvering. Maneuvering simply complicates
the HRM problem and allows less processing time for the HRM
construction. Therefore, the best HRM capability and results are achieved
in nonmaneuvering flight. The F-15E HRM has been designed to
compensate for up to approximately 4 Gs. (In contrast, RBM is insensitive
to aircraft maneuvers up to 7 Gs.)

Graze Angle

The optimum graze angle for the best quality HRM video with the APG-70
radar is between approximately 2° and 10°. At these angles, there is a
good mix of horizontal and vertical target extent. The terrain shadows
supply a two-dimensional look to the map. At higher graze angles (above
20°), the vertical nature of the video is reduced, and the map becomes
one-dimensional and lacks contrast. With low graze angle mapping, the
vertical features can dominate the map and mask targets behind them.
For example, at a 0.5° graze angle (mapping 9.5 nm away at 500 feet
altitude), an eight foot hill line will cast a 900 foot shadow and a 50 foot
ridge will cast a 5700 foot shadow.

D-31 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_38.jpeg:
Summary

The following positively affect HRM patch map capability by decreasing
processing time, improving quality, and improving geographical accuracy.

e PVU provides accurate computer velocities. Use it.
e Larger azimuth angles (squint angles).

e Shorter range (optimum inside 20 nm).

e = Faster aircraft speed.

e Nonmaneuvering flight.

e Optimum graze angle.

AGR-1 D - 32


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_39.jpeg:
RADAR DISPLAY INTERPRETATION
Preparation

Navigation by radar is very effective, but only if you have prepared for the
flight.

Pick the most significant radar features as radar update and sequence
points.

e Look for those that have easily identifiable shapes as targets/offsets
and aim points.

e  Land/water contrast and abrupt terrain elevation gradients (hills)
often produce good checkpoints.

e Try to find significant points for each leg along the route.

e Look for several significant points around the target to aid in going
from big to small (known as a pointer system).

e Study different scale maps and photos to determine radar reflective
targets, shadows, etc. Photos are good indicators of how a point will
look on a HRM patch map.

e Predict size, shape, and appearance of radar returns at various

ranges/altitudes. Pick something that will show up as a small, but
obvious return for precise navigation.

D - 33 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

Identify the effects of inherent errors, uncontrollable and controllable
factors on radar ground mapping to include:

a. Inherent errors
Beam width error
Pulse length error
Spot size error

b. Uncontrollable factors
Topographic features
Cultural features
Target size
Target shape
Target composition
Relationship of targets to one another
Unusual returns

c. Controllable factors
Range
Altitude
Tilt
Attack axis
Gain

Identify factors that enhance the quality, accuracy, and processing
time of HRM patch maps.

Identify necessary planning factors and techniques for radar
navigation.

REFERENCE:

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I A/G Radar Precision Velocity

Update (PVU) Mode

AGR-1 B-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_40.jpeg:
Prediction
e Consider run-in heading and altitude.

e Pick specific ranges that place an area of interest at one-half to
two-thirds of radar scope range when making RBM and HRM PPI
predictions.

e For the target area, make predictions for both long and short range:
long to get early determination of target area, and short to break out
the exact target when it becomes radar significant (the resolution is
better).

e Use the AFMSS radar prediction feature (if available).
e Consider land/water contrast, shadows, and snow/ice.

@e Remember that no-show areas such as lakes are usually much more
likely to match their predicted shape.

e Remember that tidal flow can change shape or location of land/water
contrast.

e When preparing HRM patch map predictions, use a clear overlay
showing display window sizes (.67 nm, 1.3 nm, etc.) for the smallest
scale chart you have. Use the outlines to draw a prediction of what
the point of interest will look like on various size patch maps.

e Consider graze angle. If an offset/aim point is too far away (or too
close) to map at your ingress altitude, pick one that is closer (or
farther away). The map does not have to be taken under perfect
conditions, just good enough to find and kill the target.

e Be careful to consider terrain between you and the point of interest to
ensure you will have line of sight. At low altitude, a 200 foot hill will
appear as a very large mountain, and its shadow may obscure the
target.

In short, without thorough preparation, the odds of successful radar
employment are very low!

AGR-1 D - 34


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_41.jpeg:
Interpretation/Technique

The most important factor in evaluating a target’s size, shape, range, and
bearing is the target’s definition on the display. Target definition can be
controlled by manipulation of the display brightness, contrast, and gain
(in RBM). As a rule of thumb, maintain the display brightness and
display contrast as high as possible and adjust the gain (when possible) to
get the best picture.

Concentrate on the scope at the predicted times/ranges.
e Go big to small (use pointer system).
e Use INS/MN as an aid.

Identify the general area in RBM, position the cursor, select the
appropriate display window, offset if necessary, and make a HRM patch
map.

e@ When time permits, start with a larger patch map, identify the
specific area, then make a smaller patch for accurate resolution and
cursor positioning. This helps ensure the desired point is within the
field of view.

Keep aspect in mind when considering different shapes/reflections for
predictions and also changes in aspect angle as the aircraft moves over the
ground.

In summary, the target should be in the general vicinity of the displayed
sequence point if the MN is reasonably accurate. The range should be
changed to put the target in the top half of the display. Analyze the larger
returns and use them as pointers for finding the smaller returns.
Thorough planning is extremely important and radar predictions of each
sequence point you plan to use should be prepared and studied.
Remember, speed is also important since whenever you use the A/G radar,
the A/A radar cannot be used to find air threats. Good planning will
reduce time in the A/G radar to a minimum.

D-35 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_42.jpeg:
Weather Detection

Weather detection and avoidance is possible in RBM mode although only
fairly heavy storms and showers normally show. Remember, there is no
peacetime mission in this command that requires intentional penetration
of a thunderstorm. The radar will help you avoid the weather when there
are no other options.

Radar Display Presentation

Severe weather is displayed on the radar display by bright returns with
indistinct edges or irregular, undefined shapes. Shadowing is quite often
present. Most aircrews describe weather returns as looking like cotton
balls.

Operation

Adjust the antenna elevation up as necessary to optimize weather returns
and remove ground clutter.

Use the antenna elevation scale to determine where you are looking with
reference to the horizon.

Reduce gain as necessary to determine the center and most severe areas of
the storm.

Considerations

Range

The area of the radar beam width increases significantly at long range.
Therefore, it may not be possible to distinguish between cells in close
proximity to each other at greater detection ranges. However, you should
be able to break out most large individual cells and squall lines at the
maximum detection ranges.

AGR-1 D - 36


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_43.jpeg:
Antenna Tilt

In RBM the radar display is stabilized in pitch regardless of AOA or
attitude. Therefore, to search for weather at your altitude you need to
move the antenna elevation to put the caret level on the antenna elevation
scale. You may want to search above or below level to aid in determining
the tops and bottoms of cells. Tops are much easier to determine because
when you search below the storm, ground clutter will also be displayed.
When the top and/or bottom has been determined, some simple math can
be applied to determine the actual altitude. One degree represents 100
feet for each mile of range.

ALT (of weather returns) = Your Altitude + (Elev x Range x 100)

Example: You are at 10,000 feet. Tops of the cells are 2° above you at
20 nm.

Alt

10,000 + (2° x 20 x 100)

10,000 + 4000

14,000 (tops of weather)

Careful manipulation of tilt allows you to determine differences in heights
of individual cells. The really high ones are probably the more severe
thunderstorms. In RBM there is a digital readout (upper left corner) of
the bottom and top of the altitude coverage at the range of the cursor.
Racing the cursor over the video and adjusting the radar tilt until the
video disappears will help determine the top/bottom of the storm cell.

Gain

Gain should be controlled manually to allow accurate interpretation of the
thunderstorm complex. With the gain setting too low only the most severe
areas of the storm will be displayed. Gain set too high results in a
noise-saturated, distorted display and the inability to discriminate
between specific cells or areas of interest. Gain should be constantly
adjusted to produce the sharpest picture.

Other Techniques

Use the mark function to mark the location/boundaries of the weather
cells. Now you can return the radar to air-to-air search (no weather
detection) and avoid the thunderstorms by avoiding the mark points.
Return to RBM and refresh the mark points as required.

D - 37 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_44.jpeg:
a.
b.

C.

ao op

QUESTIONS
gain setting is recommended for land/water contrast.

high
low
medium

gain setting is recommended for pinpoint targets.
high

low
medium

When trying to locate a specific point on the radar,

use the 160 nm range to get the big picture.

immediately make a .67 patch map.

do not worry as the radar picture always looks just like a photo.
analyze bigger returns first and use them as pointers to locate
specific points.

4. Severe weather can be detected with the radar in

Re op

HRM patch map.
HRM PPI.

RBM.

BCN.

aircraft speed decreases the processing time when making

high resolution patch maps.

a.
b.

c.

AGR-1

Faster
Slower
Varying


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_45.jpeg:
6. A good rule of thumb for establishing graze angle is that 1° at 10 nm
is

a. 500 feet.
b. 1000 feet.
c. 2000 feet.

D - 39 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_46.jpeg:
ANSWERS

l. a
2. b
3. d
4. ¢
5. a
6. b

AGR-1 D - 40


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_47.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

Targets are displayed on the radar display wider than actual due to

a. MPD malfunctions.
b. PLE.

c. doppler effects.

d. BWE.

Pulse length error

is constant for a given pulse length.
increases as target range increases.
decreases as target range decreases.
is not applicable to RBM.

po op

Smooth surfaces such as lakes appear as

dim returns.

very bright returns due to their mirror like makeup.
blank or no show areas.

larger returns than their actual size.

po op

Mountain shadows which converge behind the return indicate you
are the mountain.

a. above

b. below

c. atthe same altitude as
d. abeam

Shadows that are divergent and cover the length of the display

indicate you are the mountain.
a. above

b. below

c. atthe same altitude as

d. abeam

E-1 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_48.jpeg:
6. Ifa desired return is behind a hill, you can detect it by

a. decreasing radar range.

b. increasing gain and display brightness.

c. decreasing gain.

d. choosing another axis of attack if possible.

7 A gain setting is recommended for breaking out towns.
a. high
b. medium
c. low

8. HRM is better able to define target returns by using

a. changing doppler frequencies and rate of changing doppler
frequencies caused by angular changes and rate of angular
changes.

b. avery high speed antenna search pattern to increase the
number of reflections.

c. acomputed map background from the TSD to compare with
returns.

d. adifferent radar.

9. You are at 20,000 feet MSL and you determine the tops of a
thunderstorm 40 nm in front of you to be 6° nose up. At what MSL
altitude are the tops?

a. 32,000 feet
b. 40,000 feet
c. 44,000 feet
d. 46,000 feet

AGR-1 E -2


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_49.jpeg:
10. Errors in aircraft velocities

11.

po op

allow you to make better maps.

will cause errors in calculating doppler shift.
decrease the time it takes to make a map.

will not cause errors in calculating doppler shift.

Which of the following decreases processing time, improves the
quality, and improves geographical accuracy of a HRM path map?

a.

b.

Small squint angles, maneuvering flight, and faster aircraft
speeds

Large squint angles, nonmaneuvering flight, and slower aircraft
speeds

Large squint angles, nonmaneuvering flight, and faster aircraft
speeds

Small squint angles, maneuvering flight, and slower aircraft
speeds

E-3 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

Study the information contained in this workbook and applicable
handouts. Complete the End of Text Quiz.

C-1 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_50.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGR-1 E-4


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_51.jpeg:
A/G
A/A
AOA
BWE
CC
ETE
HRM
INS
KTAS
MN
nm
PLE
PPI
PVU
RBM
RDR
SAR
TFR

VHSIC

GLOSSARY
Air-to-ground
Air-to-air
Angle of attack
Beam width error
Central computer
Estimated time en route
High resolution map
Inertial navigation system
Knots true airspeed
Mission navigator
Nautical miles
Pulse length error
Planned position indicator
Precision velocity update
Real beam map
Radar
Synthetic aperture radar

Terrain following radar

Very high speed integrated circuit

AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_52.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGR-1 C-2


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

The primary mission of the F-15E is all-weather, day/night deep
interdiction. To accomplish this mission, the air-to-ground radar
(APG-70) plays an important role in accurate navigation to the target,
precise target acquisition, and pinpoint weapons delivery. It is imperative
that crew members understand basic radar principles and be familiar with
the F-15E’s radar capabilities.

Effective use of the air-to-ground radar depends largely upon preflight
planning and operator expertise. It is very important to carefully select
radar aim points and offsets that are within the radar’s capabilities. Even
the most experienced operator will be required to study route maps,
photographs, and radar predictions to consistently identify returns.

The following discussion considers two types of radar processing, including
pulsed radar [the APG-70 real beam map (RBM) mode], and doppler radar
[the APG-70 high resolution map (HRM) mode]. The F-15E provides RBM
video in a planned position indicator (PPI) format. It provides HRM video

in both PPI and patch map formats.

RBM provides a radar mapping mode for low resolution ground mapping
and weather detection capability. The video, in PPI format only, refreshes
at approximately one second per sweep and has six selectable range scales
ranging from 4.7 nm to 160 nm.

The HRM mode provides video exhibiting high range and azimuth
resolutions. Video refresh rates vary as a function of aircraft orientation
and map size. Typical construction times range from 2 to 12 seconds
(nominal tactical employment, about 5 to 6 seconds).

D-1 AGR-1


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_8.jpeg:
INHERENT ERRORS

The picture presented on the air-to-ground radar display is seldom a true
representation of the actual size or shape of the corresponding objects on
the ground (particularly in RBM mode). This distortion results from radar
design factors which produce inherent errors. To more accurately
interpret the radar presentation, an operator should know and anticipate
the causes and effects of these errors.

Beam Width Error (BWE)

Beam width error (Figure D-1) is only applicable to the RBM mode of the
APG-70 and is created by the width of the beam transmitted from the
radar. The width of the beam used to illuminate the target is based on
antenna size and is the most serious limitation to azimuth resolution. The
error results as the radar beam scans through space horizontally. The
leading edge of the beam strikes an object before the centerline of the
beam reaches the object. The trailing edge of the beam is still
illuminating the object after the beam centerline has passed the object.
Energy received from any portion of the beam, other than the actual
center of the beam, induces errors in the horizontal dimension. This error
is always in azimuth and applies equally to both sides of the object. Since
the area covered by the beam increases as range increases, the beam
width error also increases. One-half of the total BWE appears on each
side of the target’s radar return. At longer ranges, an object’s radar
return appears much larger than the actual object.

AGR-1 D-2


Text from AGR-1_Air-to-Ground_Radar_Introduction_page_9.jpeg:
START PAINTING PAINTING STOP PAINTING
TGT

1/2 BWE SWEEP 1/2 BWE

1/2 BWE

TRAILING
EDGE ——_—_>

'¢——_ LEADING

EDGE 1/2 BWE

AGR-01-01

Figure D - 1. Beam Width Error (RBM).

With pulse radars, such as the APG-70 RBM mode, the ability to
differentiate separate objects in azimuth depends on the size of the beam
width and aircraft range to the object. To resolve multiple targets, they
must be separated by at least the beam width (as a function of range).
The F-15E’s inherent beam width is 2%°.

However, the APG-70 and VHSIC CC employ a pseudo monopulse
processing technique that effectively sharpens its beam width to 1%4°. As
a result, the beam width at a given range is halved. In short, the APG-70
beam width error (azimuth resolution) is essentially half that of a
conventional radar with the same size antenna. The F-15E’s effective 11%4°
beam width produces the following:

RANGE FROM TARGET = Beam Width
10 nm = 1325 feet
20 nm = 2650 feet
30 nm = 3975 feet
40 nm = 5300 feet

D-3 AGR-1


