Text from Hieracrhy_page_1.jpeg:
DESIGNATIONS AND A/G HIERARCHY

A quick review of the basic bombing triangle will help you understand how we get bombs on target. At
some point the jet must put a stake in the ground to know how far away, and how high it is in reference to the
TGT to determine Slant Range (SR). There are six ways that we can designate a target: NAV, RDR, POD,
HUD, CDIP and SIT designations will be covered. Zero point will not be covered. We have 6 different ranging
sources to complete the bombing triangle: LAS, HRM, SYS, AGR, RALT, and PASS. PASS will not be

covered. Let’s go over different designation options with the associated ranging options (depending on what
you set up in the hierarchy).

SLANT RANGE (SR)
HEIGHT ABOVE TGT (HAT)

AN

GROUND RANGE (GR)

(Figure 1)

The above figure matters to you mainly because of HAT. When you take a designation (RDR for example), the
jet determines your Alt by looking at SYSG (assuming good EGI). HAT = SYSG — TGT ELEV (which you
put into the point data submenu). Don’t think that number matters for accuracy? Reference figure 2 below.

> Scenario: You don’t put in the TGT Elevation in the UFC Point Data Submenu. After flying 300+ NM to the
TGT area, you designate the DMPI in the RDR. After transitioning to the TGT Pod, you cannot find your DMPI
anywhere in your FOV so you go thru dry. BOTOT - not quite. Your jet thinks it is much farther away due to its
SR calculation. Since you put in nothing (0’) in the data submenu, the jet performed the equation this way:
SYSG (20K) — 0 = 20K’. That number will push your SR farther away and your pod is probably queuing up
short. Yes, there are other places in the world besides Dare County and the Sandbox MOA in Iraq.

A/C ALT: 20,000’ MSL

SR

TGT Elev: 5000’
HAT — 15,000’

(Figure 2)


Text from Hieracrhy_page_2.jpeg:
Hopefully you understand how the bombing triangle works and answered a few questions on why your pod may
not be looking where you expect it to be. Let’s move onto the meat of the mission. What the hell do I set for my
hierarchy, why do I set that, and what exactly is the best solution for multiple scenarios?

1 or CDES
1 or CDES
1
1 or CDES

Notes: (Figure 3) (Ref: F-15E -34)
C= Continuously calculates impact point for CDIP

1= One time shot when you take your designation

CDES= __ Continuous designation w/TPOD track and no TDC Pressure (CDES Containerized)

15°= HAT is updated at 15” TREL — Assuming it is in the hierarchy

I'll cover all designation options with various setting on the A/G Delivery page (Hierarchy).

1. NAV DESIGNATION: When you steer to a TGT point, you place a NAV designation with your PPKS. This
places a stake in the ground only as accurate as your coordinates input into the system and your PPKS, which is
normally EGI giving the solution of ground range (GR) to the target. You should look at your Menu 2 page to
continually check on your EGI accuracy and/or give EGI updates to your MN but that discussion will be saved
for later. What you should see on Menu 2 is: Y *4EGI 24’. Y=Military code. *=blended solution. 4=# satellites
tracking. 24’=position uncertainty.

NAV designations with good EGI is an accurate ranging source but as you know, we like to, and normally are
required to, verify and/or update/designate our DMPI with active sensors before being cleared to release. This is
mainly due to ROE restrictions. A NAV designation can be overwritten by any other designation procedure but
it is also one of the most accurate with good EGI and mensurated coordinates.

Bottom Line: If you do nothing else but type in your TGT point into the UFC and steer to the target, you can
only satisfy one of three ranging sources (reference Fig. 3): AGR, RALT, or SYS. Both LAS and HRM require
an active sensor to be used for the designation — 1.e. fire the laser for LAS and RDR designate w/ a pod
designation for HRM.

SYS: Height Above Target (HAT) will come from SYSG (assuming EGI is PPKS). The number comes from
the system altitude that can be found on the A/G delivery page. GR comes from accuracy of coordinates and
PPKS. This is a one time (thus passive) ranging source taken at designation. SR is the last part of the triangle
that is “computed” from the other two known sides.

RALT: Active ranging source when in an AUTO delivery and automatically chimes in at 15” TREL. HAT is
assumed to be equal to HAG while using RALT ranging. Obviously a huge miscalculation in the making if your
TGT if it is at a different altitude than you are (mountainous terrain). So whatever HAG you are at pickle, the
CC assumes that also is your HAT. RALT has a validity check and the data is only used if the aircraft attitude is
less than 60° of bank and pitch. Use only in flat terrain.

AGR: Air-to-ground ranging (AGR) is the method of computing target elevation during designations and HAT
for weapons delivery using A/G radar slant range. It provides a one time HAG computation at designation and
SR derived from antenna depression angle by pointing at the target coordinates using a 1.25° radar beam OR
points at the target through the TGT Pod LOS. Low altitudes will increase your RDR footprint and decrease
your bombing accuracy. GR is the last part of the triangle that is computed from the other two known sides.


Text from Hieracrhy_page_3.jpeg:
e Valid if: Graze angle >1.25°, Within RDR gimbal limits, and Range must be within —10,000 to +15,000
feet of the designated target position
When the pilot takes command of the HUD and the target pod laser is not firing, the CC commands the radar to
provide AGR to a HUD reference (pipper pointing). In AUTO bombing mode, AGR is provided to the
designated target. In CDIP bombing mode, AGR is always to the CDIP pipper (with or without a target

designation). All this assumes that AGR is in the hierarchy & above Sys (LHAS). Also can get by taking
command of the pod 2x as long as AGR is in the hierarchy - anywhere.

2. RADAR DESIGNATION: When you designate off a .67 HRM patch map you refine the stake in the ground
accuracy from your PPKS to ~8.5 feet at best (pretty damn good). Many factors go into getting that number
down to 8.5 feet. A recent INS and MN PVU, speed, squint, graze, G, and range, are a few key factors.
Bottom Line: You can only satisfy one of three ranging sources (reference Figure 3): AGR, RALT, or SYS if
you do nothing but designate a TGT using an HRM patch map and hit the pickle button at TREL. Sound
familiar? Reference the earlier definitions of SYS, RALT and AGR. You WILL NOT get an HRM designation
by ONLY designating the TGT with the A/G RDR. See following paragraph for HRM. Bottom line is this is
one of the BEST ways to get an accurate designation. It also forces good Radar Scope Interpretation (RSI) for
the young WSO’s. Kill it in the RDR! I like to think of it as “verifying and refining”. With your standard LHS
or LHSA, assuming good EGI, this is the most accurate designation source. This is of course debatable which
you'll read about next.

3. TGT POD DESIGNATIONS (TP): Laser ranging (LAS) is the means of using Laser slant range for
computing target range/elevation and/or HAT for target designations and computed weapons deliveries. With a
TP designation, you can have any of the 6 ranging sources applied: LAS, HRM, SYS, AGR, RALT, and PASS.
Same rules apply with SYS, AGR, and RALT. Let’s cover the HRM validity.

HRM: * HRM takes the stake in the ground from your RDR Des (GR) and uses TP Angle (SR) to determine
HAT.
To get an HRM designation, you must:
1. Take a RDR designation of the TGT.
2. Update your designation of the TGT with the TGT POD without firing the laser sometime prior to
hitting the pickle button.(which we never do--intentionally). With the standard LHS, LHAS or
LHSA, when you fire the laser to re-designate with the pod, LAS will become the valid ranging
source. *Note: There are rare cases where LAS will get stuck in “San” meaning sanity checks not
complete. Take a look at your A/G Delivery page. HRM in and of itself is not the best choice with
LAS or SYS stacked above; although not a bad choice at low altitude. At best, you’re looking at
100’ accuracy.

LAS: Do steps 1 and 2 above AND fire the laser? Now you get LAS ranging (LHS hierarchy setup). LAS is
best used if =2.5° graze (I actually like closer to 5°). Note how low altitude delivers will hurt you by updating
and designating in the Pod using laser ranging due to spotlight effect.

HAT DIST in NM from TARGET
Feet 1 75 10 15 20

30 40 50 60
0.4
te
0.7 :

0.9 0.5
1.9 1.0 0.6 0.5
1.4 0.9 0.7 0.5

(Figure 4)


Text from Hieracrhy_page_4.jpeg:
Here is where the misconception lies when aircrew think that Pod designations are getting you a “better
designation”. Look at Figure 3 closely and you’ll see that under a TGT Pod Designation using LAS as a ranging

source it says “1 or CDES”. People always say, “Gutter, I thought that the pod using laser ranging is one of the
most accurate sources out there?” Before I get into scenarios, I’1l preface my words with —I do not teach to
sport bombing. Young WSO’s should practice solid procedures on the range so that they’re second nature when
in combat — Period. RSI in this community is much worse than bad........ it sucks. I could care less where a
BDU-33 flies on the range if the procedures are solid.

EXAMPLES AND TTP ’'s

Scenario 1: Dropping LGB’s with good EGI or a MN update & designation: I designate my DMPI perfectly in
the RDR. I do nothing else (with my sensors) until 8” TIMPCT and guide my bomb to the DMPI. Yes the
assumption is the time from designation to drop is well within 5+00 minutes. This is not a paper on TGT pod
search so by “do nothing,” I mean — no update and designation with the pod on final.

Scenario 2: Dropping LGB’s with good EGI: I designate my DMPI perfectly in the RDR. I then wait for valid
LAS ranging (5 digit) in the POD and re-designate. I do nothing else until 8” TIMPCT and guide my bomb to
the DMPI.

** Tn both scenarios, I’m actually dropping BDU’s — doesn’t matter whether they’re 50’s or 33’s or MK-82’s
for that matter. Which bomb score is going to be better? I will argue that Scenario 1 will be better — or at least is
less likely to get jacked up. Remember that “1 or CDES” statement? I will bet on my one time designation in
the RDR over my one time designation using the Targeting Pod. Remember, it’s the “one time” in the pod I
could potentially have a problem with. CDES selected with LAS ranging is a whole different story but we don’t
practice those procedures due to delay Las options on most drops. Many factors affect that one time
designation: water, laser energy, pod pointing errors, did you really have 5 digit ranging or “4.5nm” in the upper
left hand corner of the pod when you designated? I learned under the old school of killing things in the RDR
and you know what, it works. I’ve seen many students since I’ve been an instructor not have a clue what they’re
looking at in the RDR, transition to the Pod and are assholes and elbows hoping, searching and praying that
they find their target in the pod on a check ride. It’s easy to compare the student that confidently kills their
DMPI in the RDR, and sits on his/her hands waiting for TREL knowing that the DMPI will be somewhere very
close to their cursors when they return to cue. No frantic searching and heavy breathing during that 1+30 from
designation to TREL!

One disclaimer here is the difference between Training Laser and Combat Laser. In short, Training Laser
updates (or solves the bombing triangle) at a rate of 1 Hz or 1 time per second. Combat laser works the same
equation at a maximum of 20 times per second. So remember this difference if you’re at the range and your
scores suck but your procedures are solid — with training laser set, you’ ll loose quarters. If I’ve designated with
my sensor capable of achieving ~8.5’ accuracy and have good EGI, I’m not sure I can “increase the accuracy”
of my designation. Remember, we’re dropping LGB’s so why really “increase the accuracy” by a few feet when
my bomb is looking for a basket anyway? Again, less likely to get jacked up if I killed it in the radar already.

The last thing I’ll say about Pod designations is this. There are scenarios where you should take that one time
designation in the Pod. Answer this question to your self — not now, but while going 9 miles a minute: “ Will a
designation in the pod increase the accuracy of my designation?” If the answer is yes — than do it! Weapons
effects that you planned at 0 knots is the goal. Here are a few examples:

A. Good EGI, found my DMPI in the RDR, found it at 15” TREL in the pod — I’m done until 8” TIMPCT.
Assumes medium altitude and LGB’s. I’ve already verified and refined my designation. *This is
debatable and my technique. My mentality is this: how much am I refining my designation — we’re
talking a couple of feet at best. I believe that the LGB’s can handle that cross range vs. what could go
wrong by messing with the pod and laser at 15” TREL.


Text from Hieracrhy_page_5.jpeg:
B. Bad EGI or running MN, couldn’t find the DMPI or offset in the RDR, found it in the pod at 15” TREL
- Get valid Las ranging and designate. Assumes medium altitude or >2.5°graze angle.

C. Low Alt loft with or without EGI — climb to map and designated my DMPI in the RDR. I’m done until
8” TIMPCT to las. Don’t mess with the pod in a loft!

D. Low Alt loft w/EGI- climb to map and couldn’t find my DMPI in the RDR. I’m done until 8” TIMPCT;
don’t mess with the pod in a loft!

E. Low Alt loft no EGI — climb to map, took an update designation within 5+00 minutes of release — I’m
done until 8” TIMPCT. Have I mentioned, don’t mess with the pod in a loft!

F. Low Alt LAT w/ good EGI — climb to map and designated my DMPI in the RDR. I will put in AGR
above SYS or fire the laser down the chute to get active ranging for a countdown in the HUD.

G. Low Alt LAT w/ bad EGI or running MN- climb to map and couldn’t find my DMPI in the RDR. I now
have a NAV Des which I’ Il follow up with a TGT Pod Designation while in the check-to-climb or down
the chute (remember when there is G on the jet (insert range), stop firing the laser. Again, use AGR or
LAS for an active source for SR in the HUD.

H. Low Alt loft no EGI or running MN — no update/designation within the last 5+00 minutes due to threat
reactions, gross RSI or whatever. I’m designating in the pod — especially if the TGT has good vertical
development. Re-attack would be my first option but without getting into a whole tactical scenario, this
must be a high risk mission, we have to get in and out and I only got one chance to kill this target. I'll
take a designation while the front-seater is in a pull to sacrifice some CTBE. I think in this case, I
answered the above question to myself “can I increase the accuracy of the designation” as “YES”.

Disclaimer: Don’t take what I say or this paper and use it as a checklist. After the B-course and after MQT, you
must be able to think while traveling at high rates of speed with multiple tasks being thrown at you. As with
most operations the F-15E, the best route to take depends on the situation. In weapons delivery, the
situation depends on the type of ordnance, delivery, weather, threat, terrain, ROE and aircrew
proficiency. The above eight examples certainly DO NOT cover ALL possible scenarios, they merely hammer
home the point to know what delivery your doing (and your backup) and keep track of what you have set for
your hierarchy so you’re not surprised when AGR kicks in and takes the A/A RDR at 15” TREL (for example).

**Remember, I’m not saying DO NOT re-designate in the pod...... this is my technique for LGB’s. If I did not
kill it in the RDR w/ bad EGI or running MN is my #1 case where I’ll designate in the Pod. Another may be a
update / designation outside of 5+00 with or without good EGI. Others will say always designate in the pod but
most of those people are not fully on board with how accurate my EGI actually is (or I’m trying to teach habit
pattern to the B-course studs).

4. HUD DESIGNATIONS: HUD designations are handled by the CC in the same way as a Pod Des. It derives
it’s SR from Pipper to TGT and it’s HAT from SYS G assuming good EGI. Two techniques are to designate
using the TDC or the pickle button. I highly recommend only using the TDC method with today’s ROE’s and
constraints with regards to dropping weapons in anger. When you reach for the red button with your thumb — I
think you better mean it.

5. CDIP: LAS, AGR, RALT and SYS are the four ranging sources used with CDIP. I’ll cover the most
common scenario. At a minimum we’ll have some kind of designation out there on or close to the target that
we’re getting ready to roll in on. If doing diving deliveries, I normally want AGR or RALT in the equation prior
to SYS. I want an active source for two reasons. 1. I want SR displayed in the HUD. 2. I want an active ranging
source down the chute for the most accurate designation at release.

5. SIT DESIGNATIONS: I won’t get too involved here but simply mention this. You have to know where
your designation is coming from. Is it coming from JSTARS, AWACS, or another Strike Eagle. Bottom line is
as of this paper August 2006 we really use the SIT to cue our systems and then rely on standard designation


Text from Hieracrhy_page_6.jpeg:
procedures. If you’re wondering how accurate you’re pod or RDR will cue, look at the altitude when you hook
the designation, this is the most inaccurate measurement taken from the SIT designation.

Final Suggestions and Common Student Errors:

Next time you’re out flying CT — Flush the quarters BS at the range and go out there to learn something. Here is
a recommended profile (assuming LGB procedures on each drop), have an A/G delivery page up on your
R-MPCD to watch the validity checks done real-time. Reference Figure 5 at the end of the paper for where to
find Designation source and Ranging source on the A/G Event Page.

1. Fly with LHSA. Take a RDR Designation and do nothing else until 8” TIMPCT.

. Same LHSA, this time take a RDR Designation, then update that with the TGT Pod prior to pickle.

3. Same LHSA, this time take a RDR Designation (or don’t), PTRK your DMPI and fire the Laser
continuously until just prior to pickle. Next time fire the Laser all the way through pickle simulating a
drop with continuous laser planned. Take command of the pod 2x and see if AGR kicks in.

4. Next switch to LHAS. Designate in the RDR. See when exactly your AGR kicks in on an Auto attack —
what does the A/A radar look like.

5. Next switch to LHRS. Designate in the RDR and leave it, see what RALT give you.

Do the same designation (.67 RDR with expand) on each pass and see what your scores are. I bet you'll be
surprised. Remember these are BDU’s not LGB’s. Bent fins, slow firing carts, winds etc will all lead to various
scores so don’t take your best score and file that as your #1 hierarchy setup in the future. I’ve done similar
profiles on many trips to the range and I’ve learned a ton. I recommend you do the same.

There are many, many more checks that you can do from diving and climbing deliveries out of the RDR pattern
to pilot events. Bottom line; know what each setting gives you.

I’ve already hinted at common student error #1: No RSI. Dare County sets you up for failure here; there’s no
doubt about that in my mind. Remember when killing TGT’s in the RDR to know what you’re looking for. A
3.3 map is a confirmation tool for me. Do I see the relationships from my TGT to my offsets? Yes, then lets
scroll down to a 1.3 or a 6.7 and dig out my DMPI. Dare County sets your pacing for “real” targeting way off.
You should not be so conditioned to “freeze” the RDR if it’s not giving you what you want. Let it cook off
another map and you may have a much clearer picture the second or maybe even third .67. WSO’s be
DIRECTIVE is the FCP isn’t giving you what you need — Squint, graze, airspeed etc....

Pod search, confirmation and tracking techniques are not good from young studs. Remember, this all starts on
the systems check. I will focus and tune my pod when I start to pass the altitude that I’m doing my primary
attack. I take a look at Auto Level Gain (ALG) but rarely set it. You can get a better picture if you spend a few
seconds on it. When I’m on final, I’m switching from BHT to WHT to see which gives me the best picture and
it also serves as a shadows confirmation tool. I’m also looking for all the confirmers, fakers, and pointers that
1B talked to me about in the brief. I refuse to sit in NFOV and stare at the crosshairs waiting for my DMPI to
appear. Take a look around from 1+30” to +30” TREL. At 30” TREL, it’s time to start digging out your DMPI
and giving the pilot a ““DMPI captured, cleared to release” call. If you can that call earlier, great. Just don’t
expect it and certainly don’t get nervous if it hasn’t happened by 30” TREL. Remember around 13 NM is the
max range for combat laser. That equates to about 1+30 on the clock prior to TREL anyway. Later you’ll learn
about CDE and the bus load of nuns. Remember these are LGB’s so if you see friendlies coming into your
FOV endgame, slowly drag it off your target!


Text from Hieracrhy_page_7.jpeg:
Radar setup starts on the ground. I set B or C Channels on the Radar. I turn my gain down to 6. I can always
bring it up if need real-time. I don’t buy the ML2 in an urban area. Use it if you’re conditioned to freeze the first
map you see because it’s probably as good as it’s going to get. If you use my technique, I’m sure that a good
INS PVU in the cap followed up with a MN PVU prior to mapping (assuming MN PPKS) and letting a few
.67’s cook off will get you just as good a picture as ML2 (My technique). If you’re in the B-course or MQT- set
MLI — period.

I’m done — questions or comments, see me.

Capt “Gutter” Artzer

A/G EVENT DATA

DLVRY PARAMETERS
AGR

>
DEZ SOURCE
SN, TGT INFO

DESG RDR/SYSB/AUTO

(Figure 5)


