Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY
AGD-3
BASIC BOMBING

APRIL 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_10.jpeg:
Distance Traveled Calculations

In working bombing problems, the traditional time distance relationship
applies:

distance _
time

eed

or

distance = speed x time

As always, consistent units must be used throughout calculations. In most
bombing problems speeds are specified in knots true airspeed (KTAS), times
are specified in seconds, and distances are specified in feet. These are not
consistent units; so conversion is necessary.

The following conversion factors apply:

Inm _ 6076 ft -16 ft

1 knot = = =],
hr 3600 sec sec

A sample calculation is made to find the distance (D) traveled in 5 seconds if
the speed is given as 475 KTAS:

D = speed x time x conversion factor
D=475 kt x 5 secx 1.69 ft/sec/kt
D = 4013.75 ft

AGD-3 D-4


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_11.jpeg:
Crosswind Corrections

Crosswind corrections (Figure D-2) are generally referred to as “drifting” or
“crabbing.” These terms really only have meaning relative to a fixed run-in
line. If you fly the planned run-in heading and drift toward the target as the
sight drifts toward the release aim point, you are drifting. If you adjust the
attack heading upwind so as to parallel the run-in line, you are crabbing.
Regardless of which method you use, the pipper must end up on the same
release aim point (RAP)—there is only one.

<WIND

RAP (RELEASE
AIM POINT)

(EXPANDED FOR
ILLUSTRATION)

RUN-IN LINE

CRAB DRIFT

AGD-03-02

Figure D - 2. Crosswind Corrections.

D-5 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_12.jpeg:
In this example (Figure D-2), the wind is a direct crosswind. For a no drag
bomb, the crab line would be on the run-in line, and for a high drag bomb, it
would be only slightly upwind.

Zero Sight Line

This is the reference from which all sight settings are measured; it is the
sight line which exists at 0 mils. In the F-15E, the zero sight line (ZSL) is
represented by the gun cross and is 2° above the fuselage reference line
(waterline) which is not displayed in the A/G master mode (Figure D-8).

+ ZERO SIGHT LINE

ZSL AOA

O- FLIGHT PATH
) SDFP

DEPRESSED SIGHT
LINE

AGD-03-03

Figure D - 3. Zero Sight Line.

ZSL Angle of Attack (AOA)

ZSL AOA is the angle between the ZSL and the flight path vector. AOA is
related to gross weight, calibrated airspeed, and dive angle.

Sight Depression from Flight Path (SDFP)

SDFP is the angular difference between the impact point of the aircraft and
the impact point of the bomb. It varies with dive angle, airspeed, altitude,
bomb range, and is expressed in milliradians (mils).

Sight Setting

ZSL and SDFP are extracted from weapons delivery tables for airspeed and

dive angle, and are summed to obtain sight setting mils to be set in the A/G
delivery display.

AGD-3 D-6


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_13.jpeg:
Aim-off Distance (AOD)

After release, the bomb is accelerated downward by gravity and slowed by
aerodynamic drag. These factors cause the bomb to travel along a curved
path and to impact the ground some distance short of the aircraft’s extended
flight path. The ground distance between the target and the projected flight
path intersection with the ground is called the aim-off distance (Figure D-4).
It is important to understand AOD, since it is a basic parameter for manual
bombing, and is also important for computed deliveries. It is the ground
distance subtended by SDFP at release. This distance can be computed using
triangulation, or it can be determined using Dash 34 charts. Once the
distance is known, an aim-off point (AOP) can be determined. This AOP does
not change throughout the pass and is useful for rollout and for tracking
analysis. The best wind-corrected reference for the AOP is the velocity
vector. In other words, during a perfect dive bomb pass, the velocity vector
remains exactly on the aim-off point.

r +  ZSL

ZSL AOA
O-  AOP

AOD<
L<<fS> TET

SDFP
IPP
RETICLE
DEPRESSED

AGD-03-04

Figure D - 4. Aim-off Distance.

The initial pipper placement (IPP) is also important at rollout to track to the
target at bomb release. The IPP is the distance the pipper is short of the
target at the track point altitude.

D-7 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_14.jpeg:
TYPES OF MANUAL WEAPONS DELIVERIES
Level

The term “level delivery” refers to any attack with a planned delivery angle of
0-4° of dive/climb. This type of delivery is normally conducted at low altitude,
but can be conducted at any altitude.

Release Conditions

The release parameters are relatively easy to achieve. Probably the most
difficult parameter to achieve is to be in exactly level flight (i.e., exactly 1 G).
When using a fixed sight, small pitch deviations cause significant range
errors.

Using manual delivery modes, altitude is limited by the available sight
depression. You have to be able to see the target over the aircraft nose.

Accuracy

The accuracy of the low level attack is quite good if the target can be
positively identified. This is because bomb range is relatively short. As
altitude and bomb range increase, aiming errors are magnified and accuracy
suffers. Because of this, the level attack is normally a low altitude attack
profile.

Target Detection

For a large target with vertical development, detection ranges are quite good.
Because of the very shallow look angles, if the target is small, hidden, or has
no vertical development, detection may be delayed to the point where steering
corrections cannot be made prior to release. Indeed, the target may not be
detected at all.

Exposure

One of the primary advantages of the low level attack is your ability to avoid
detection by the enemy. However, you are in the heart of the AAA envelope.
At low altitude, your own weapon frag is a threat. A relatively minor loss of
altitude could lead to disaster.

AGD-3 D-8


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_15.jpeg:
Climbing

The climbing attack refers to any profile involving a release in a climbing
attitude. A long range attack with a low drag weapon released in a climb is
called a loft. The other climbing attack is called the LADD (low altitude
drogue delivery), which is used to deliver nuclear weapons.

Release Conditions

Release conditions are relatively difficult to predict and achieve. Very small
variations in climb angle can result in large range variations. For loft,
release normally occurs 2-4 nm from the target and at a climb angle of 5-40°.
For LADD, release will normally occur virtually over the target and at a
climb angle of 45°. Large climb angles can produce disorienting flight
conditions, and may be restricted by low ceilings.

Accuracy

Bombs delivered from a climb have a long time of flight. Low drag bombs
delivered from a loft have a very long range. The long time of flight means
large wind correction factors, making bombing in a wind quite difficult. The
long bomb ranges associated with loft deliveries (about 20,000 feet) amplify
any aiming errors. These two sources of error combined make bombing of
point targets with general purpose bombs a challenge, at best, using a
noncomputed system.

Target Detection

Since the climbing attack is conducted from low altitude, target detection
problems are the same as for the low level attack. These problems are
further complicated by the very long bomb ranges. In fact, during a loft, it is
quite likely you will not see the target.

Exposure

Once again, approaching at low altitude reduces the enemy’s ability to detect
your presence. However, during the pull-up and recovery, you are vulnerable
to detection and attack. Fortunately, this portion of the attack is short, and
the recovery maneuver itself constitutes a defensive maneuver. Except for
nuclear weapons, escaping weapons effects is not normally a problem.

D-9 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_16.jpeg:
Diving

The diving attack refers to any delivery profile with a planned dive angle of
5° or greater.

Release Conditions

Release conditions are relatively difficult to achieve during a diving attack.
For the low angle/low altitude attack, release range is relatively easy to judge
and is not terribly sensitive to small variations in parameters. For the high
angle/high altitude attack, release range is quite difficult to judge and is very
sensitive to small variations in parameters.

Accuracy

The accuracy of low angle/low altitude dive bombing is quite good. As dive
angle and release altitude are increased, accuracy drops off; but this is
partially compensated for by better target acquisition, and accuracy remains
acceptable.

Target Detection

Because of the steeper look angle and viewing time, target detection is very
good. In fact, many times a lookdown on the target is the only way to
visually acquire it.

Exposure

For the high altitude roll-in and pull-off, exposure to enemy fighters, certain
SAMs, and large caliber AAA are definite factors and must be considered in
planning the attack. If a pop-up maneuver is employed, exposure is minimal
prior to the pop. In the pop, exposure is high; but if the attack is properly
planned and executed, the duration is brief.

AGD-3 D-10


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_17.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

The reference line from which sight mil settings are measured is the

po op

aircraft waterline.
fuselage reference line.
zero sight line.

missile boresight line.

If you fly an adjusted run-in heading which causes you to parallel the
“planned” run-in line, you are

a. drifting.

b. crabbing.

Accuracy of the level attack is better at altitude.
a. low

b. high

Release conditions for the loft attack are

Ro op

easy to predict but difficult to achieve.
difficult to predict and achieve.

easy to predict and achieve.

difficult to predict and easy to achieve.

For ease of visual target identification, the best attack profile is

a.
b.
e.

level.
climbing.
diving.

D-11 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_18.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. ¢
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. Cc

AGD-3 D-12


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_19.jpeg:
WEAPONS DELIVERY RECOVERY MANEUVERS
General Considerations

Before looking at specific recovery maneuvers, briefly look at some general
considerations. To determine your release altitude, consider safe escape, safe
separation, fuze arming, altitude lost during the dive recovery, and the
desired weapons effect. The highest applicable altitude/time must be used.
Safe escape data from your weapons is given for specific escape maneuvers.
Safe escape from weapon fragmentation and ground avoidance are the
primary considerations in recovering from any attack.

If you do not exactly follow the specific maneuver guidelines, you may
significantly increase your probability of being struck by fragmentation from
your weapons. Safe escape/safe separation data considers all weapon
fragments except an extreme few such as lugs, hardbacks, fuze wells, etc.
The probability of one of these objects being aimed at the delivery aircraft is
very small. It is operationally accepted that with a properly flown escape
maneuver, the probability of being hit by one of these fragments is less than
or equal to 1 chance in 1000 when releasing at minimum altitude.

Safe Escape/Safe Separation

Safe Escape

This is the minimum safe distance between the aircraft and a bomb which
explodes at impact. It is normally expressed as a minimum release altitude.
You must consider this for all bombs. Remember, safe escape does not
consider secondary explosions which may drastically change the frag pattern.
For proximity fuzed GP bombs, the detonation altitude must be added to the
minimum release altitude for safe escape.

Safe Separation

To avoid the frag of a bomb which explodes at the end of the arming time, a
safe separation distance must exist between the bomb and the aircraft when
the arming timer expires. Safe separation is the same distance as safe escape
but is normally expressed as a minimum time of fall, in seconds. You are
required to determine and achieve this for all bombs, but it is critical for
bombs equipped with proximity fuzes and certain CBUs. This distance
determines the minimum fuze arm time setting (allow for negative fuze
tolerances). Positive fuze arm tolerance dictates the minimum altitude
required to guarantee the bomb is armed at impact.

D-13 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGD-3, December, 1997

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_20.jpeg:
Ground Clearance

Safe escape data provides minimum release altitudes for frag avoidance. In
addition, for diving deliveries, altitude loss during multiple releases and dive
recovery is included for ground avoidance. The data is based on a zero foot
clearance plane. If the wing or squadron does not establish required ground
clearance, the crew must determine how much ground clearance is required
for recovery from a diving delivery.

Detailed instructions on the use of safe escape/safe separation data is
contained in TO 1F-15E-34-1-3 and TO 1-1M-34, Section VI.

Recovery Maneuvers

Minimum altitudes for dive recovery and safe escape are computed in CWDS.
Minimum altitudes are based on the aircrew flying one of the following
escape maneuvers after release.

1. Level Straight Through Maneuver (LST) (Figure D-5). This maneuver is
used with level deliveries only and consists of maintaining a level,
constant speed flight profile for at least 3 seconds plus the TOF of the
last bomb released.

pe AT TOF + 3 SEC RELEASE |

AFTER RELEASE OF LAST BOMB, THE LST PROFILE MUST BE CONTINUED FOR AT LEAST
THREE SECONDS PLUS TOF OF THE LAST BOMB OF THE RIPPLE.

NOTE

THE LST MANEUVER IS USED ONLY WITH LEVEL RELEASE
AGD-03-06

Figure D - 5. Level Straight Through Maneuver.

AGD-3 D-14


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_21.jpeg:
Climbing Maneuver (Figure D-6). This maneuver is used for deliveries
using 0-60° of dive. The maneuver is begun after weapon release with a
5.0 Gin 2 seconds pull. Military power is applied as the nose reaches
the horizon and G is maintained to a 20° climbing flight path angle. Gis
then relaxed as the climb angle is increased to 30°. The minimum
release altitudes for this maneuver allow for bank angles of up to 30°
during the recovery. Once a 30° climb is established, the escape
maneuver is complete and target egress may be initiated.

EGRESS AT
30° CLIMB ———>
PULL 5 Gs

“Sag IN 2 SEC \ a é

REDUCE G RELEASE

NOTE

THE ESCAPE MANEUVER TERMINATES AFTER REACHING THE 30 DEGREE FLIGHT
PATH ANGLE. THE MINIMUM RELEASE ALTITUDES DEPICTED FOR THIS ESCAPE
MANEUVER ALLOW FOR BANK ANGLES UP TO 30 DEGREES DURING RECOVERY.

AGD-03-07

Figure D - 6. Climbing Maneuver.

D-15 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_22.jpeg:
3. Turning Maneuver (Figure D-7). This maneuver is used for deliveries
using 0-20° of dive. The maneuver requires 5 Gs for at least 60° of turn
to ensure separation and normally results in a descending turn away
from the target. At release, simultaneously select mil power to attain
5 Gs in 2 seconds while rolling as required (60-85° of bank) to initiate
the turn and decrease dive angle to approximately 5°. Maintain the 5 Gs
for at least 60° of turn and vary bank to control flight path vector and
rate of descent. Guard against an increased bank angle and/or reduced
G which may result in a very nose low altitude. If necessary, reduce
bank angle and increase G to ensure terrain clearance while achieving
60° of turn. Failure to achieve 60° of turn may result in
self-fragmentation. Once 60° of turn is achieved, the escape maneuver is
complete and target egress may be initiated.

This safe escape maneuver is not authorized for use in ACC

aircraft.
PULL 5 Gs IN 2 SEC
WHILE ROLLING TO
60-85° OF BANK
TURN MINIMUM
OF 60°
(5° OF DIVE)

INCREASED BANK ANGLE AND/OR INSUFFICIENT G MAY RESULT IN VERY LOW PITCH ATTITUDES.
BANK ANGLE SHOULD BE DECREASED AND G INCREASED TO REDUCE PITCH ATTITUDE AND
INSURE TERRAIN CLEARANCE WHILE CONTINUING TO MANEUVER FOR 60 DEGREES OF TURN.
FAILURE TO ACHIEVE 60 DEGREES OF TURN MAY RESULT IN SELF-FRAGMENTATION.

AGD-03-08

Figure D - 7. Turning Maneuver (0-20° of Dive).

AGD-3 D-16


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_23.jpeg:
Level Turning Maneuver (Figure D-8). This maneuver is also used for
deliveries using 0-20° of dive and results in a turning escape maneuver
that is level rather than descending. At release, simultaneously select
mil power and attain a wings level pull of 5 Gs in 2 seconds. As the nose
approaches the horizon, use a loaded roll (2-5 Gs) to establish a level
turn. Maintain 5 Gs through at least 60° of turn to ensure safe
separation. Again, guard against increased bank angles or insufficient
G which could result in a very nose low altitude or failure to complete
60° of turn in time to ensure safe separation. Once 60° of turn is
complete, target egress may be initiated.

This safe escape maneuver is authorized by ACC over land with
a discernable horizon.

WINGS LEVEL
PULL TO HORIZON
(5 Gs)

LOADED ROLL TO
5 G LEVEL TURN

RELEASE

TURN MINIMUM
OF 60°

AGD-03-09

Figure D - 8. Level Turning Maneuver (0-20° of Dive).

D-17 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_24.jpeg:
5. Backup Escape Maneuver. This maneuver is designed for use when
unexpected terrain, weather, or threats preclude use of the planned safe
escape maneuver. It is not to be used as a primary escape maneuver.
The maneuver is designed to provide reasonable assurance of safe escape
for most anticipated situations assuming the release altitude is greater
than or equal to the minimum release altitude provided for turning
maneuver safe escape. The maneuver is initiated by establishing a 5 G
in 2 seconds pull. As the nose approaches the horizon, select mil power
and maintain 5 Gs until 20° of climb or 60° of heading change has been
achieved. If executing a climb, relax G at 20° as climb angle is increased
to 80°. The maneuver is complete and target egress may be initiated
when 30° of climb or 60° of heading change is achieved.

AGD-3 D-18


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_25.jpeg:
CWDS Data

Figure D-9 is an example of the data in a CWDS product for a climbing
maneuver recovery. Note that the minimum release for a 30° dive at 500
KTAS is 2470 feet AGL to achieve safe escape from your bomb and equates to
a 4.86 second safe separation time. It is also well above the 1370 foot release
required to avoid the ground on pullout.

F15E PW220 W/CFT MAX FRAG TRAVEL
MK-84 LD
5G CLIMB MANEUVER ALTITUDE (FT) HORIZONTAL (FT) TOF (SEC)

OFT TDA 2855 3295 28.9

RELEASE | SAFE ESCAPE
P SINGLE RIPPLE - 2 BOMBS

30 MSEC 75 FEET 150 FEET

MRA IMP | MRA _sINTV| MRA _ INTV
KNOTS} FEET FEET FEET |FEET MSEC|}FEET MSEC

1370 2470 4.86
30.0 525 1490 2540 4.81
30.0 550 1610 2600 4.75
30.0 575 1720 2670 4.70
30.0 600 1840 2760 4.70

8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
6
6
6

AGD-03-10

Figure D - 9. Safe Escape CWDS.

Two other considerations that must be made are finding a fuze setting that
exceeds safe separation and separation from other aircraft bombs dropped in
front of you.

D-19 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_26.jpeg:
Fuze Arming Distance

Fuze arming distance for a particular fuze is the vertical distance below the
aircraft where the fuze becomes armed. Most fuzes have several timer
settings. Selection of an acceptable fuze arming delay setting for a particular
mission is based on the safe escape data, type of fuzing (contact or proximity),
and operational considerations. Fuze arming data is computed by CWDS for
release conditions and desired fuze settings. A setting above the safe
separation time is required and will force a release altitude above safe escape
altitude to preclude a dud bomb.

Vertical drop required for fuze arming is independent of release G, but is
dependent on dive angle and TAS. If bomb impact occurs within the fuze
arming distance, a dud bomb is probable. The arming delay setting plus the
positive tolerance and inherent fuze delays are used by CWDS in the
determination of the vertical drop required for safe separation defined in
Figure D-9 as MRA (minimum release altitude). Current tolerances on
arming delays and delays for these fuzes are listed in TO 1-1M-34.

AGD-3 D - 20


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_27.jpeg:
Fragmentation Envelope

In addition to avoiding the fragments of your own weapons, you must avoid
fragments of another aircraft’s exploding weapon. You must know where
their fragmentation will be at any time after an explosion. Within the
limitations of certain simplifying assumptions, this information is generated
and presented in TO 1-1M-34, section VI in tabular format (Figure D-10) and
is also shown at the top of CWDS safe escape tables (Figure D-9, page D-19).
Note that the data in the CWDS product may differ slightly from the chart in
TO 1-1M-34 but appears to be more conservative.

MAXIMUM BOMB FRAGMENT TRAVEL

ALTITUDE HORNE TIME OF FLIGHT
(FEET) (SECONDS)

(FEET)
MUNITION

UNITARY WARHEADS
M22 2140 | 2500 | 2550 | 2900 24.4 25.9

ALL TYPES

INTACT CLUSTERS

CBU-52B /B
CBU-58/B, A/B 1895 2140 2290 2595 23.0 24.4
71/B,A/B

*TDA = TARGET DENSITY ALTITUDE

AGD-03-05

Figure D - 10. Fragmentation Envelope.

The table gives the maximum dimensions of a frag envelope. While
fragments are airborne, flight inside the envelope is not reeommended. When
using the table, consider all bombs dropped in your proximity. You must
avoid at least one of the three dimensions of altitude, horizontal distance, or

time.

D-21 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_28.jpeg:
BALLISTIC COMPUTATIONS
Basic Considerations

With the advent of computed bomb release systems, the amount of number
crunching in mission planning has been considerably reduced. There may
still be a need to deliver bombs manually, however. There are several ways
to come up with the hip pocket mil settings you need to carry with you.

TO 1-1M-34 contains planning checklists which provide a step-by-step
procedure to generate mission data. This is by far the most time consuming
method but it works when computer programs are unavailable. However,
some data is only available in the computer and hard copies of common
deliveries should be maintained.

A quicker method is to use one of the squadron’s computer programs to
generate all the mission data.

Data Requirements

Regardless of which method you choose to produce your mission data, you
must bring certain information to the problem.

Target Data

As you begin this phase of a mission plan, you have already determined the
target and the weapon to be used against it. This information is usually
given to you in an air tasking order. You need to know the target elevation to
be able to compute release indicated altitude. Additionally, you need density
altitude, or pressure altitude and temperature, to determine safe escape and
ballistics.

Weapon Data

The specific weapon determines the set of tables to use. You also need some
information about the fuze. Specifically, you need to know the type (i.e.,
proximity, impact, or timed) and the arm time, which may or may not be
predetermined. Last, you must know any special requirements such as
desired area coverage, pattern length/density, or impact angle.

AGD-3 D - 22


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_29.jpeg:
Delivery Data

Much of this information is determined before you begin ballistics
computations. In some cases (e.g., specific impact angle required), you must
enter the tables with the hard requirements and work backwards to get a
release airspeed, altitude, and dive angle. Whichever approach you take, you
must have dive angle, release airspeed, release sequence (number and
interval of bombs), required ground clearance, and aircraft gross weight. At
this time, you must also determine the type of recovery maneuver you intend
to use.

The Big Picture
Whether you use computed deliveries or manual methods, your delivery and
resulting target destruction are significantly affected by your ability to

position the aircraft precisely.

The big picture as seen from above is shown in Figure D-11.

TRACK RELEASE AIM-OFF

icy i
RADIUS POINT POINT TARGET POINT
HORIZONTAL BOMB RANGE AIM-OFF
TRACK DISTANCE
DISTANCE

BASE LEG

AGD-03-11

Figure D - 11. Dive Bomb Pass (Overhead View).

D - 23 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY

=)

—
Dif —t_t_Wyp y g hon oo

COVER

BASIC BOMBING

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to the basic bombing problem. It outlines the
various delivery profiles and leads you through the basic steps to plan and
execute a manual delivery in the F-15E.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0000. eeecccesnceceeseeceseeeessaeecssaeecessaeeessaesensaeesesaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeseeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.000. eeeeeeeeeee C-1
CEE os ses sans sos cores nos nas ois cua cares canis ans as RSA SNS Onis aU KUNE kK NewS SHES KoRKG MU NaS HSS aUD KR D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ... ceeseeeeseecessneecssaeecessaeesessaeeseseeeeeaees E-1
(ina) F-1
HANDOUT 000 eeecceceesnceceseeeeesacecesneecesaeecesaeecssaeeeessaeesesaeesssaeesesaees G-1

A-1 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_30.jpeg:
When you look at the bombing triangle in profile (Figure D-12), you can see
how the vertical and horizontal components can be combined to give you a
distance from, and an altitude above the target to establish a consistent base
leg.

TURN RADIUS (3.5 Gs)
ALT LOST
ROLL-IN

: aS » TRACK POINT ALT

ALT LOST

AGL TRACKING*.
BASE 2 ye i.
LEG
ALT
RELEASE :*.

ALTITUDE: ~

AIM-OFF

HORIZONTAL HORIZ TRK |
DISTANCE

TURN RADIUS DIST

TRACK POINT DISTANCE
MINIMUM ATTACK PERIMETER

i BASE LEG TO TARGET»
i DISTANCE FROM BASE TO AOP >

BOMB RANGE _ |

AGD-03-12

Figure D - 12. Bombing Triangle.

Procedures

The intent here is not to make you an ace at computing mil settings, but to

review the general process and point out some areas of the procedures that

should be accomplished even when you fully intend to use a computed mode
such as AUTO or CDIP. After establishing your preliminary data, the first

thing you must do is determine the release altitude.

AGD-3 D - 24


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_31.jpeg:
Sample Problem

To see how all of this works, follow through the sample problem.

As'(c)- 010) re BDU-33 D/B, SUU-20
AUVSPee 0........cccccessssccccceceeessesssssceeeeeeceeeeessesssseeeeeeees 475 KCAS (500 KTAS)
TUT A cer ser er ee re ee ee ee ee ee eee see see see see 2 30°

Aircraft Weight ............ccccccccccccccccccccccecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 55,000 pounds
Release Altitude..........ccccccccccccccesesseesteeeeeeeeeeeeseeesaees 4000 feet AGL

Target Temperature .............ccccccceessessesesssesessesssesees 13°C

Target Pressure Altitude ..............ccccccseeessssssseseeseeees 1000 feet MSL
Target Density Altitude................cccccceeeesesesseeeeeeeeees 1000 feet MSL

Pp atks "TG vs sce sees exe sous sas eves ones one enn sows exes ene antes exe woes 5 seconds

Min Recovery Alt ..............ccccccceeesesesssssssssssessesseeseeees 2500 feet AGL
Solution

Release Conditions

The first parameters to determine are release dive angle, airspeed, and
altitude. Release altitude, dive angle, and airspeed are dictated by the
threat, weather, desired weapons effects (i.e., pattern or impact angle), and
aircraft limitations (i.e., external stores limitations and maximum speed
attainable, both from the Dash 1). Altitude must also consider safe
escape/safe separation and fuze arm weapon limitations.

Release Altitude

Since the assigned weapon is a practice bomb, safe separation and safe
escape are not factors. However, the minimum recovery altitude is a
consideration. From Figure D-9 on page D-19, a CWDS product, it can be
determined that for a 30° dive angle, an airspeed of 500 KTAS, with a 5.0 G
in 2 seconds pull, the aircraft will lose 1370 feet during pullout. By adding
1370 to the minimum recovery altitude of 2500 feet, a minimum release
altitude of 3870 feet is obtained. To avoid interpolation problems and to
make release altitude an easier number to remember, the 3870 will be
rounded up to 4000 feet AGL.

D - 25 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_32.jpeg:
Weapon Ballistic Data

After determining munition release altitude, airspeed, dive/climb angle, and
separation it is time to go to the bombing tables in the CWDS computer
program (Figure D-13). This is the only source of ballistic data. Select the
parameters for the specific weapon and delivery profile. Look for an altitude
and TOF equal to or greater than the values determined in the above
procedure. You will need to know the target density altitude or pressure
altitude and temperature. You can now extract the ballistics parameters
associated with your delivery. These data are bomb range, TOF, impact
angle, sight depression from the flight path (SDFP), and the wind correction
factors. Remember that impact angle may be critical and you may have to
select other parameters based on it.

AC

WPN
DELIVERY
SUSP
TDA

DIVE
ANG

F15E PW220 W/ICFT GROSS WEIGHT 55000
BDU-33D/B

DIVE

SUU-20

1000 FT

WIND CORRECTION
FACTORS

RELEASE BOMB TIME SLANT
ALT TAS RANGE OF RANGE

IMPACT SIGHT
ANGLE DEP FROM

ABOVE
TGT
FT

FALL

SEC

8.90
8.55
8.18
9.87
9.50
9.12
10.80
10.42
10.03
7.23
6.83
6.45
8.10

FLIGHT H/T

PATH
MILS

192
167
148
209
182
163
225
197
176
149
127
112
163

MILS/KT

1.1
1.0
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.9
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.4

CROSS

DRIFT
FT/ KT

15
14
14
17
16
15
18
18
17
12
12
11
14

30 4000 500 59137 167 6510 44 139 1.2 13
Q 0S 4 ‘

30
30 4500
30 4500

AGD-3

450
500
550

5368
5641
5840

8.94
8.49
8.05

7004
7216
7373

D - 26

Figure D - 13. CWDS Ballistic Data.

AGD-03-13


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_33.jpeg:
Zero Sight Line AOA

Using the aircraft gross weight, true airspeed, and dive angle, determine the
ZSL AOA at release from the TO 1-1M-34 tables (Figure D-14). Simply enter
the appropriate chart with the entry arguments and read off the AOA.

The sight setting is simply the ZSL AOA plus the depression (SDFP) from the
ballistic tables. This is the number of mils you enter on the A/G delivery
display prior to beginning the attack. For this problem, add 139 mils

(Figure D-138) to 58 mils (Figure D-14) to get a total sight depression angle of
192 mils. Set 192 mils on the A/G delivery display for BDU-33 direct
deliveries or for manual deliveries using a fixed sight. (If bombing using
direct deliveries because of central computer failure, mils are set on the UFC,
Menu 2, PB #2.)

AIRCRAFT GROSS WEIGHT -/55,000 LB
DIVE ANGLE (DEG)

ZERO SIGHT LINE ANGLE OF ATTACK (MIL) TABLES

NOTE: ZSL TABLES ARE COMPUTED USING 5000 FT DENSITY ALTITUDE.
ANY DEVIATION RESULTS IN ERRONEOUS AOA. KTAS MUST BE
CORRECTED FOR DENSITY ALTITUDE TO RELATE TO AOA.

AGD-03-14

Figure D - 14. ZSL AOA Table.

D-27 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_34.jpeg:
Attack Development

Track Point

This point defines one end of the track point distance, also called the
minimum attack perimeter (MAP), and is where you should stabilize your
flight path and begin to track the target (Figure D-15). To find the track
point, compute the track distance (which is equal to average true airspeed

from rollout to release) times 1.69 (to convert knots to feet per second) times
the planned track time.

track distance = true airspeed x 1.69 x track time

Since average true airspeed is an estimate, this calculation can be less
scientific than it sounds. A sample calculation based on an average true
airspeed of 475 knots and track time of 5 seconds yields:

track distance = 475 KTAS x 1.69x5 seconds = 4014 feet

To find the altitude lost while tracking, multiply track distance by the sine of
the dive angle [in this example assume a dive angle of 30° (Sin 30° = 0.5)].

altitude lost = 4014 feet x 0.50 = 2007 feet
Add 2007 feet to release altitude to calculate track point altitude.
To find the ground distance covered during tracking, multiply the track

distance by the cosine of the dive angle (Cos 30° = 0.866).

horizontal track distance = 4014 feet x0.866 = 3476 feet

Add the horizontal track distance to the bomb range to find the track point
distance.

AGD-3 D - 28


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_35.jpeg:
TURN RADIUS (3.5 Gs)
ALT LOST
ROLL-IN

y wee eee eee o TRACK POINT ALT

ALT LOST
AGL TRACKING.

RELEASE }*.:
ALTITUDE: ~

AIM-OFF

HORIZONTAL | HORIZTRK | BoMBRANGE | SISTANCE |

| TURN RADIUS

DIST
TRACK POINT DISTANCE
MINIMUM ATTACK PERIMETER
\¢ BASE LEG TO TARGET»
'¢ DISTANCE FROM BASE TO AOP >i

AGD-03-15

Figure D - 15. Bombing Triangle.

Track Point ZSL AOA

Track point mils are recomputed and are different than release point mils
because you are at a different airspeed and further away from the target and
aim-off point. These mils will be subtracted from release mils to determine
the initial pipper placement on rollout.

To determine the ZSL AOA you must know the airspeed at the track or
rollout point. You can only make an educated guess based on your airspeed
prior to final maneuvering and the amount of maneuvering planned to

achieve the track point. In other words, make a guess. Using the same chart

as in the release point AOA determination, reenter with the track point

airspeed and find the ZSL AOA mils. If you estimate your rollout speed at
450 KTAS, reenter the chart (Figure D-14) and interpolate between 440-460
KTAS to get 61 mils.

D - 29 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_36.jpeg:
Aim-off Distance

The aim-off distance remains constant throughout the attack but is most
useful during the rollout. Using the aim-off charts (Figure D-16) in

TO 1-1M-34, you can determine the required aim-off distance in feet. It is
this distance in feet that remains constant from rollout to release. The angle
subtended by this distance varies throughout the pass and is responsible for
the pipper movement across the ground as you approach the target (not
counting any wind). Find the aim-off distance in feet and a sight depression
angle at rollout by entering the chart with release SDFP.

Using an aim-off chart for 30° dive (Figure D-16), enter with the SDFP

determined from the ballistic tables (139), proceed up to the release altitude
(4000 feet AGL) and over to read the aim-off distance in feet (1775).

2500

2000

ALTITUDE
AGL (FT)

1500

AIM-OFF DISTANCE (FT)

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
SIGHT DEPRESSION FROM FLIGHT PATH (MIL)
30° DIVE

AGD-03-16

Figure D - 16. Aim-off Distance.

AGD-3 D - 30


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_37.jpeg:
Another way to find aim-off distance is to divide release altitude by the
tangent of the dive angle and subtract bomb range from the result.

AOD = release altitude 7

tan dive angle

A sample calculation for a BDU-33 released at 4000 feet AGL in a 30° dive
yields (BR = 5138 feet, tan 30° = .0577):

AOD = 4000 — 5138 = 1790 feet
tan 30°

Note: This is only 15 feet different from the 1775 feet using the chart.

The chart illustrated in Figure D-16 may also be used to determine track
point aim-off distance (AOD) mils. AODtp mils are required to compute
initial pipper placement (IPP). To determine AODt? mils, begin at the left
edge and read to the right from aim-off distance (1775 feet) along the original
line, stopping at track point altitude (6007 AGL). Then read down to obtain
the number of mils which subtend AOD at track point (about 87 in the
example). Use this number to compute IPP.

D-31 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_38.jpeg:
Initial Pipper Placement

If you take the release sight setting and subtract the AOA and aim-off mils at
the track point, the result is the initial pipper placement (Figure D-17). This
is the distance the pipper is short of the target (in mils) as tracking begins.

IPP mils = Sight Setting - AOD,,, - AOA,»
or

IPP mils (44) = 192 - 87-61

ZSL
x |
AOA AT TRACK 64 miLs
POINT i
t O x
SIGHT
SETTING Lain MPO NT 87 MILS
192 MILS
SDFP AT TRACK
POINT A t
IPP 44 MILS

v v ‘oS: Yy

Figure D - 17. Initial Pipper Placement at Track Point.

AGD-03-17

AGD-3 D - 32


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_39.jpeg:
Base Altitude

This is little better than a guess, which depends on how much maneuvering
must be done and the technique used. For the standard 90° base-to-final
turn (box pattern), altitude lost in the roll-in can be computed by multiplying
the roll-in turn radius by the sine of the dive angle. Adding this altitude loss
to the track point altitude yields the base, or roll-in, altitude.

2
turn radius (TR) = PEAS SAO , Where G, = radial G
Gp X 382.2

In this example, assume Gr equals cockpit G and that roll-in is accomplished
at 342G. Therefore,

2
TR = 450x169)" _ 5199 foot
3.5xX32.2

Altitude lost during roll-in equals TR x sine 30° = 5132 x .5 = 2566 feet.
Therefore, roll-in altitude equals 8573 feet AGL (6007 + 2566).

Track Point Distance

The track point distance is equal to bomb range (5137 feet) plus the
horizontal distance covered while tracking (3476 feet), which have already
been calculated. Therefore, the track point distance equals 8613 feet from

the target.

If a ripple delivery is accomplished, half of the horizontal distance covered
during the ripple release must be added so the middle bomb hits the target.

D - 33 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the definitions of terms and the relationships used in
computing bomb delivery parameters.

2. Identify the attributes of different types of weapons deliveries.

3. Identify the attributes of the different weapons delivery recovery
maneuvers.

4. Identify the factors and/or requirements used in ballistic
computations for manual deliveries.

5. Identify the major steps to perform manual bomb deliveries.

6. Identify how incorrect parameters and external factors affect bomb
impact accuracy.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-34-1-3 Safe Escape/Safe Separation
Maneuvers

TO 1-1M-34 Section VI Safe Escape/Safe Separation
Definitions Fuze Arming
Data
Maximum Fragment Travel
Chart

Section VII Bombing Geometry
Error Analysis

Section VIII Mission Planning
Chart and Table Examples

TO 1-1M-34-2FD-E (CWDS) Ballistics Tables
Safe Escape/Safe Separation
Data

AFTTP 3-3 VOL XVII Manual Modes

AGD-3 B-1


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_40.jpeg:
Base Distance

The base distance is the distance from the target at roll-in to arrive at the
track point (Figure D-18). It is defined as track point distance plus the
horizontal distance covered during the roll-in. This horizontal distance is
equal to the roll-in turn radius times the cosine of the dive angle.

turn radius (TR) x = cos 30° = base turn distance

The turn radius (5132) times cos 30° (.866) is equal to the base turn distance
(4444): plus, track point distance (8613) is equal to the base leg distance
(13,057).

2566' J

5132' TURN RADIUS (3.5 Gs)

ALT LOST
ROLL-IN
: » TRACK POINT ALT 6007’
2007
; ALT LOST.
8573 TRACKING ™..
AGL . NeeeeeeS
BASE
LEG
ALT
4000
RELEASE !
ALTITUDE :
4444' | 3476 | 51 a | 1775' |
HORIZONTAL |! HORIZTRK BOMB RANGE AIM-OFF
TURN RADIUS DIST DISTANCE
8613)
— TRACKPOINT DISTANCE —>»
MINIMUM ATTACK PERIMETER
< 13057’ ly
BASE LEG TO TARGET
, 14832! ,
DISTANCE FROM BASE TO AOP

AGD-03-18

Figure D - 18. Bombing Triangle.

AGD-3 D - 34


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_41.jpeg:
Base leg can be computed manually, or you could do it using the Dive Angle
Versus Distance chart (Figure D-19) from TO 1-1M-34. Enter the chart at
the desired base leg altitude (8573 feet AGL), proceed right to the dive angle
(30°), and down to the distance (14,900 feet). This distance is to the aim-off
point—not the target. You must subtract AOD (1775 feet) to get base
distance (13,125). This is close enough to our calculated distance of 13,057
feet. Rounding the base altitude to 9000 feet AGL would give us an AOD of
about 15,200 feet or a base distance of 13,425 feet vs 13,125 feet which is
close enough to 13,057 feet for most bombers. If you are bombing in a wind,
you need to modify your base leg position. It is generally more acceptable to
modify base leg position rather than base leg altitude. Use about 3 times the
crosswind correction factor listed in the CWDS tables for the type of delivery
you are attempting. (If the correction factor is 10 feet/knot, correct your base
leg by 30 feet/knot).

24

S
23 war
22 (e)
21 <4
<Z5 (7)
20 <2 Ay
19 S95
18 4
<0
17 <p,
16 7g
15
%6
g" NEES
12 <p | SK 1%
= 44 Z & s
im $a 19S .
Q 10 ENS)
Z 9g 0
> 8
fe} &
27 Loo
Ww oy
Q 6 wy)
= 05
5 5 45
4
‘ YY 40°
3
2 =
1
0

012 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
DISTANCE FROM AIM-OFF POINT (FT X 1000)
AGD-03-19

Figure D - 19. Dive Angle Versus Distance.

D-35 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_42.jpeg:
MSL Conversion. All altitudes must be converted to MSL which then can be
read in the HUD. In this example, roll-in altitude is 9573 feet MSL, track
point altitude is 7007 feet MSL, and release altitude is 5000 feet MSL. All

were obtained by adding the target elevation (1000 feet MSL) to the AGL
altitudes computed.

AGD-3 D - 36


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_43.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Safe escape charts provide ground clearance based on a ___ foot
clearance plane.

a. O

b. 200
ce. 400
d. 1000

The standard planned pullout parameter for recovery from diving
deliveries is

3 Gs in 4 seconds.

3.5 Gs in 2 seconds.

5 Gs in 2 seconds.

4.5 Gs in 1.25 seconds.

pe op

The published climbing recovery/escape maneuver for the diving delivery
terminates as

the aircraft nose reaches the horizon and the descent stops.

the descent stops, regardless of nose position.

the aircraft climb angle reaches 30° above the horizon.

the descent rate is reduced to one-half the descent rate at release.

pe op

Sight setting is the sum of ZSL AOA plus

The aim-off distance or aim-off point throughout a
dive bomb attack.

a. remains constant

b. moves away from the target
c. moves toward the target

D - 37 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_44.jpeg:
ANSWERS

l. a
2. ¢
3. Cc

4. SDFP or sight depression from flight path

5. oa

AGD-3 D - 38


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_45.jpeg:
MANUAL DELIVERIES

Pattern

Base Leg

The secret to manual bombing is to fly a proper and consistent base leg
(Figure D-20). In fact, the most likely cause of poor parameters in a manual
dive bomb pass is failure to establish a proper base leg position. Of course,
the ideal is to be able to look out the canopy and “see” the proper dive angle.
Initially, you probably need to be a little more mechanical than that.

'¢——— ALTITUDE—___»

i DISTANCE FROM AOP >

AGD-03-20

Figure D - 20. Base Leg.

D- 39 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_46.jpeg:
Roll-in Technique

There are several roll-in techniques used for dive bombing, but all have the
same goal: to end up at the track point on airspeed and on dive angle. To do
this, you must lead the turn by one turn radius at whatever G load you
intend to use (usually 3-4 Gs). With your eyes on the aim-off point, roll to
bring the point near the top of the canopy (the approximate bank angle to use
is 80°, plus the dive angle). Now, pull the aircraft around to roll out with the
velocity vector on the AOP.

AOD and IPP

As you roll out and the velocity vector moves to the aim-off point, cross-check
your dive angle and initial pipper placement (Figure D-21). Immediately
correct your IPP, if necessary. For most events you have an IPP of 40-70 mils
(44 mils in our example). If you are on track point parameters and your IPP
is correct, the pipper tracks to the target and arrives as you reach release
altitude.

ace~.
~ en

v Mon
( GF}

nee IPP (44 MILS)

AGD-03-21

Figure D - 21. AOD and IPP.

AGD-3 D - 40


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_47.jpeg:
Tracking (No Wind)

After establishing IPP, you must allow the pipper to track smoothly to the
target (Figure D-22). Because AOA decreases as you accelerate, you see little
pipper movement initially. This takes about 1-3 seconds of your tracking
time. After airspeed is set and AOA stops changing, the pipper moves toward
the target. The pipper moves the fastest during the last third of tracking
time. Approximately 2 seconds prior to release, the pipper is 25 mils short of
the target (i.e., the top of the reticle is on the target). If you maintain a
constant dive angle, the velocity vector remains stationary over the aim-off
point.

Do no forget to pickle as the pipper intersects the target and you reach
release altitude.

‘\ FIXED AT
AIM-OFF POINT FIXED AT

AIM-OFF POINT

aw ater,
o

a ™™

{ Gr

.
Me, -

a

RETICLE MOVES TOWARD TARGET; TARGET GROWS IN
RELATIVE SIZE.

AGD-03-22

Figure D - 22. Tracking (No Wind).

To kill any 3 or 9 o'clock error, the pipper should track down the run-in line
and the aircraft should pass directly over the target.

If the above tracking indications are not present, take immediate and positive
corrective action. You only have time for one or two corrections prior to
reaching release altitude. If you are still making corrections as you reach
release altitude, it is very easy to induce an error, such as a bank angle or G
error, which will likely produce a miss.

D-41 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_48.jpeg:
The tracking rules, then, are:
e Make smooth positive corrections.
e Accept small errors to avoid last minute corrections.

Wind Corrections

If you stay in the bomb dropping business for 20 or so years, you may get to
drop on a no-wind day two or maybe even three times. The rest of the time,
you will have to drop in a wind, and the odds are it will not be a head/tail
wind.

RAP (Release Aim Point)

To bomb in a wind and still hit the target, you must make some adjustments.
Essentially what you do is bomb a new “target” located upwind from the
actual target by a distance equal to the wind-caused miss distance. This
distance is found by multiplying the wind speed by the crosswind correction
factor (XWCF) (18 ft/kt) from the ballistic tables in CWDS (Figure D-13,
page D-26).

RAP = wind speed x XWCF

The RAP becomes your new target, and you must meet all your no-wind
parameters with the pipper on the RAP to hit the actual target.

RAPE (Release Aim Point - Extended)

Since your aircraft is being blown downwind while you are coming down the
chute, you must further extend your release aim point upwind to account for
this drift. The RAPE is found by multiplying the wind speed (knots) by 1.69
by [bomb TOF + track time (in seconds)].

RAPE =wind x1.69x(TOF + track time)

The RAPE must be determined for both drift and crab tracking methods to
determine IPP. In either method, the pipper is under RAPE on rollout and
tracks to the RAP at release.

AGD-3 D - 42


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_49.jpeg:
AOP

For the drift method (Figure D-23), the aircraft rolls out upwind by a distance
equal and parallel to the RAPE. If you use the crab method, the aircraft is
between the target and RAP (to compensate for bomb drag) but the pipper is
still under the RAPE due to the crab. In either case, if the velocity vector of
the HUD is functioning properly, it compensates for the wind and is only
moved upwind from the aim-off point the amount you are offset from the
target at release.

HAIRLINE SYMBOLS - NO WIND

AGD-03-23

Figure D - 23. AOP and IPP Winds.

IPP

Your initial pipper placement (Figure D-23) must also be moved into the wind
by a distance equal and parallel to the RAPE. An approximate rule of thumb
is to use two times the crosswind correction factor.

D - 43 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read the references in TO 1F-15E-34-1-3.
3. Scan the material in TO 1-1M-34, Sections VII and VIII.

4. Read the references in AFTTP 3-3, Volume XVII.

C-1 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_50.jpeg:
RAP Tracking

Your pipper must now track (Figure D-24) from its initial placement to the
release aim point (RAP). The RAP is your new target and the pipper must be
on the RAP at release altitude. However, if you roll out with the proper IPP
relative to your rollout aim point (RAPE) and your flight path takes you
across the target (very slightly upwind, actually), the pipper should be on the
RAP when you arrive at release altitude.

Pickle as the pipper reaches the release aim point.

aS

~ ”
i v
SANZ

AGD-03-24

Figure D - 24. Tracking (Wind).

AGD-3 D - 44


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_51.jpeg:
BOMB IMPACT ACCURACY
Noncrew-caused Errors

Inherent Weapon Dispersion

Inherent dispersion is primarily the result of construction variances. As with
anything else, no two bombs are exactly alike. For low drag weapons,
dispersion is about 5 mils. For high drag weapons, dispersion is about 8 mils.
Although the dispersion is greater for the high drag weapons, the shorter
release slant ranges may result in a smaller overall miss distance.

Installation Errors

For free-fall weapons, this is very small. The flight path of a free-fall bomb is
determined by the flight path of the aircraft at release, weapon drag, and

gravity.

Aircraft Systems Errors

The same manufacturing errors that affect weapons also affect aircraft
systems. No two radars, HUDs, or INSs are alike. Further, when it comes to
installing or aligning these systems and boresighting them, a combination of
tolerances may result in some pointing errors. Some of these systems errors,
primarily the error associated with boresighting, are predictable. After a few
passes, you are sure “this airplane drops 30 feet left.” This type of error can
be compensated for by adjusting the aim point. Squadrons normally track
these types of errors in some sort of systems book which crews can review
prior to flight. There is another category of error which is random and is
related to the slop or noise level within a system. This type error you just
have to accept.

Assumptions

All ballistic tables and even the airplane CC make certain simplifying
assumptions before solving ballistics problems. One common assumption is a
standard atmosphere. These assumptions cause small errors in ballistic
solutions.

D - 45 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_52.jpeg:
Crew-caused Errors

Aiming Errors

Pipper Not On Release Aim Point (RAP)

This is normally the result of poor tracking technique or simply a tracking
error. The correct aim point is known; you simply run out of tracking time
before the pipper gets to the RAP. Another possibility is to mistakenly think
the pipper was on the RAP at pickle; this error is normally caught during
postmission tape review. Remember, the RAP is the same as the target, only
for a no-wind condition.

Release Aim Point Not Known

This is a very common situation where winds are concerned. The error is
usually the result of using the wrong wind or a computation error in
determining the wind offset aim point. Additionally, in manual dive
bombing, it is common to make small errors and then make an offsetting
correction to another parameter. Since these corrections are made rapidly,
there is ample room for error. Finally, the problem may simply be the result
of not being able to identify the correct spot on the ground. Whatever the
reason, if you make an aiming error the bomb follows the aircraft trajectory
at release and misses the target.

Parameters

In examining parameter errors there are two general assumptions made: the
pipper is on the target, and only one error exits. This is seldom the case, and
for most errors, if they persist for any length of time, another error surely
results.

Altitude

Munitions released from a higher than planned altitude have a greater than
planned range to travel to the target. Although the longer time of fall
increases the bomb range over that planned, the increase is never as great as
the longer range which exists. As a result, a bomb dropped from a higher
than planned altitude falls short. Conversely, a bomb dropped at a lower
than planned altitude falls long.

AGD-3 D - 46


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_53.jpeg:
Airspeed

Munitions released at a lower than planned airspeed fall short of the target
for two reasons. First, the weapon simply will not travel as far due to
reduced airspeed. Also, the lower airspeed alters the AOA of the delivery
aircraft and therefore reduces the effective depression. Conversely,
munitions released at a higher than planned airspeed go long.

Dive Angle

If munitions are released in a shallower than planned dive angle at the
planned altitude, the aircraft is farther from the target than planned.
Additionally, reducing dive angle increases required sight depression. These
errors combine to cause a shallow bomb to fall short of the target. A bomb
delivered from too steep a dive falls long.

G Loading

The instantaneous effect of increased G is to increase the AOA and reduce the
effective depression from flight path resulting in a short bomb. If increased G
is held for any length of time, a dive angle error results, compounding the
problem. If the instantaneous G is reduced (bunt) the effect is opposite and
the bomb goes long.

Bank Angle Error

Since the sight is depressed below the flight path, it acts like a long
pendulum. Rotating this pendulum results in two errors. First, the sight
rotates away from the bank angle; second, the reticle moves forward in range.
As a result, if a bomb is dropped in a bank, the bomb falls short and in the
direction of the bank from where the pipper is pointed.

Uncoordinated Flight
Since a bomb travels along the flight path at release, if the sight line is not

along the flight path, an impact error results. The bomb impacts laterally in
the direction of any skid.

D - 47 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_54.jpeg:
Parameter Errors

Dive Angle

Shallow - short

Steep - long
Airspeed

Slow - short

Fast - long
Altitude

High - short
Low - long
Bank

Short; laterally in the direction of bank

G

Pull - short

Bunt - long
Skid

Laterally in the direction of skid
Corrections

Release Aim Point
If you find you did not have the proper aim point, recompute it as necessary

and move it. If the problem was in tracking the aim point, resolve to track
more accurately on the next pass.

AGD-3 D - 48


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_55.jpeg:
Base Leg Adjustments

If you had an error in parameters, the most likely problem is that the base
leg was not properly flown. Improper base leg position can result in dive
angle errors and altitude errors. Roll-in technique is most often responsible
for airspeed problems, but roll-in problems are normally the result of trying
to correct for base leg positioning errors. The bottom line for parameter
errors is to make the necessary corrections to your base leg on the next pass.

Crew Coordination
Pilot

The pilot’s primary job is to fly the aircraft, avoid the ground, and fly to the
proper release point. Additionally, the pilot selects delivery options.

WSO

The WSO is the primary sensor operator. During manual deliveries there is
little or no sensor operation to be performed so the WSO can help the pilot by
calling airspeed, dive angle, and altitudes. Defensive lookout is required
during any delivery. In addition, the WSO should monitor the attack and
provide checklist support to the pilot.

Error Analysis

Between passes, the crew should analyze the previous pass to determine
what corrections, if any, should be made on the next pass. Downwind is the
best place to do this because this is where you have the most time, and most
adjustments have to be made on the base leg.

Assumptions

Basic error analysis assumes the pipper was on the target and only one error
exists. Because of these assumptions you need to separate aiming errors
from parameter errors. If you did not have the pipper on the “proper” target,
fix it on the next pass. If you did have the pipper on the “proper” target/aim
point and the bomb still missed, then you must have made an error in
parameters. If you do not know where the pipper was and where the bomb
hit relative to the pipper, you have no basis to make a correction.

D - 49 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_56.jpeg:
CONCLUSION

That is about it for manual deliveries. You will not get to do them often, but
many of the principles involved in manual bombing will also affect the
accuracy of computed deliveries. The more aspects of the bombing problem
you solve by flying consistent and accurate passes, the better your computed
deliveries will be.

Knowing the correct aim-off point is critical even for computed deliveries. If
you do not know it and pick a distance too close to the target, you have an
excellent chance to frag yourself or even contact the ground during your
recovery.

AGD-3 D - 50


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_57.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Installation variance is a major source of error in determining bomb
impact accuracy.

a. True
b. False

Which of the following release errors cause a bomb to impact short of the
target? (Pipper on target, no other error.)

Release altitude lower than planned.

Release in a 30° bank.

Release in a steeper than planned dive angle.
Release at a lower G loading than planned.

po op

When bombing in a wind, your IPP is moved into the wind ___ time(s)
the crosswind correction factor (track time = bomb TOF).

ao op
BPO ND Re

D-51 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_58.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. b
2. b
3. b

AGD-3 D - 52


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_59.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

Following a bomb release, the distance a bomb lags behind the
delivery aircraft is known as

a. bomb range.
b. bomb lag.

c. bomb trail.
d. trail off.

Which type of delivery profile is most sensitive to aiming errors?
a. Level

b. Climbing
ec. Diving

The most commonly used type of attack profile for a visual attack is

a. level.
b. climbing.
c. diving.

Track point ZSL AOA is based on

base leg true airspeed.

release true airspeed.

roll-in calibrated airspeed.

track point density altitude of 5000 ft.

ae op

If the pipper is on the target at release but the pilot’s foot is
depressing the rudder to the right, you should expect the bomb to

miss the target to the right.
miss the target to the left.
hit the target.

miss the target short.

po op

E-1 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-3 C-2


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_60.jpeg:
6. Dive Angle Versus Distance charts are based on distance from

the target.

the aim-off point.

bomb range.

the initial pipper placement point.

ao op

7. The release aim point for a crabbing delivery is

closer to the target than the drifting RAP.
farther from the target than the drifting RAP.
the same point as the drifting RAP.

always on the target.

ao op

AGD-3 E-2


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_61.jpeg:
A/G

ACC
AGL
AOA
AOD
AOP
AUTO
BDU
CBU
CC
CDIP
CWDS
GP
HUD
INS
IPP
KCAS
KTAS
LADD

LST

GLOSSARY
Air-to-ground
Antiaircraft artillery
Air Combat Command
Above ground level
Angle of attack
Aim-off distance
Aim-off point
Automatic
Bomb dummy unit
Cluster bomb unit
Central computer
Continuously displayed impact point
Combat weapon delivery software
General purpose
Head-up display
Inertial navigation system
Initial pipper placement
Knots calibrated airspeed
Knots true airspeed
Low altitude drogue delivery

Level Straight Through Maneuver

AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_62.jpeg:
MAP Minimum attack perimeter

Mil Milliradian

MRA Minimum recovery altitude
MSL Mean sea level

RAP Release aim point

RAPE Release aim point - extended
SAM Surface-to-air missile

SDFP Sight depression from flight path
SUU Stores suspension and release unit
TDA Target density altitude

TOF Time of fall

TR Turn radius

UFC Upfront control

WSO Weapon System Officer

ZSL Zero sight line

AGD-3 F-2


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_63.jpeg:
HANDOUT

The following are examples of CWDS products for a MK 84 LD release at
30° of dive, 500 KTAS, and 4910 MSL releases.

NOTES:

Fuze data (page G-2): the maximum fuze arm time is worst case and
includes a 20% tolerance for the M905 tail fuze which is greater than the
10% for a M904E2.

Release conditions (page G-2): the 4910 MSL minimum release altitude in
this example is based on maximum fuze arm time to prevent a dud. Note
TOF is also 7.2 seconds. You would want to change the release altitude to
a round number (as an example, 5000 MSL) and recompute the solution.
In this example, a 90-foot change is only about 2 mils.

Safe escape (page G-3): There are only 2 safe escape tables for 0 and 5000
foot target density altitudes. Use the closest one. Safe escape is not a
problem with 6 second arm time. The profile output example shows the
altitude lost of 13867 feet for a 1000 foot TDA and recovers you at 3543
MSL. Further down the page (weapon MRA information) you see the
minimum release altitude for safe escape is only 3512 MSL, 3583 to
accommodate altimeter lag.

CAUTION: CWDS will not advise you if safe separation is not met for
mechanical fuzes. You need to compare the safe escape table TOF (4.86
seconds) (page G-5) to your fuze arm time minus fuze tolerance

(6 - 1.2 = 4.8). The tolerance can be determined by subtracting the
maximum fuze arm time from the fuze setting (7.2 - 6 = 1.2 seconds) in the
fuze setting section on page G-2. In this example you would need to retry
the problem using an 8 second fuze setting to exceed the 4.86 seconds
needed (8 - 1.6 = 6.4 minimum arm time) which again changes all your
data of release altitude, mil settings, etc.

Ballistic table (page G-7): Note the TOF from 4000 AGL (7.34 seconds)
exceeds our maximum fuze arming of 7.2 (page G-2) and the table is clear
if arming time exceeds TOF based on fuze setting inputs.

Error analysis (page G-8): Note that short errors tend to exceed long
errors of the same amount.

G-1 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_64.jpeg:
CWDS Profile Output

*** DLEASE NOTE ***
Minimum Release Alt driven by fuze arming.

** MISSION DATA ***
AIRCRAFT

GROSS WEIGHT
MUNITION
SUSPENSION
DELIVERY

** FUZE DATA ***

FUZE LOCATION

NOSE FUZE

NOSE FUZE TIME SETTING
TAIL FUZE

TAIL FUZE ARM TIME SETTING
MAX FUZE ARM TIME

** RELEASE CONDITIONS ***

NUMBER OF WEAPONS RELEASED

RELEASE ALTITUDE FIRST WEAPON

RELEASE ALTITUDE CORRECTED FOR ALT LAG
RELEASE DIVE ANGLE

RELEASE AIRSPEED

TARGET DENSITY ALTITUDE

TARGET ELEVATION

*e* TRACKING INFORMATION ***

INITIAL PIPPER PLACEMENT

PERCENT DOWN BOMB FALL LINE FROM FPM
AIM-OFF DISTANCE

AVERAGE TRACK VELOCITY

MINIMUM ATTACK PERIMETER

ROLL-OUT (TRACK) AIRSPEED

AOA AT TRACK ALTITUDE

TRACK TIME

TRACK/MAP ALTITUDE

TRACK/MAP ALT CORRECTED FOR ALT LAG

** WEAPON CONDITIONS ***
ZERO SIGHT LINE AOA

S.D.F.P.

TOTAL SIGHT SETTING
CROSSWIND CORRECTION
HEAD/TAIL WIND CORRECTION
F-15 CFT LATERAL DISPLACEMENT
RANGE FIRST RELEASE TO IMPACT
SLANT RANGE AT RELEASE

TIME OF FALL FIRST RELEASE
WEAPONS IMPACT ANGLE
WEAPON IMPACT VELOCITY

AGD-3

F-15E PW220 W/CFT
55000

MK-84 LD

BRU-47/A

Dive

Nose and Tail
M904E2

6.00 SEC
M905

6.00 SEC
7.20 SEC

1
3910A 4910M
4984M
30 DEG
470C
1000 FT

1000FT

500T

305M

44.6 MILS
49.0
0.3NM
823 FT/SEC
1.4NM
433C
36.0 MILS
5 SEC
6967M
7042M

1621FT

8715FT
475T

5967A

65.5 MILS
126.8 MILS
192.3 MILS
12.2 FT/KT
1.1 MILS/KT
42FT
0.8NM
6468FT
7.20 SEC
43 DEG
959 FT/SEC

5152FT

77M

494M

2656M
.74M

1570M


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_65.jpeg:
“ee SAFE ESCAPE SAFE SEPARATION DIVE RECOVERY INFORMATION ***

SAFE ESCAPE MANEUVER

DIVE RECOVERY G

ALT LOST DURING DIVE RECOVERY
MIN ALT DURING DIVE RECOVERY

*** WEAPON MRA INFORMATION ***
Minimum Release Alt driven by fuze arming.
MIN RECOVERY ALTITUDE (user input)
MRA FOR MIN RECOVERY ALTITUDE
including alt lag
MRA FOR GP FUZE ARMING
including alt lag
ABSOLUTE REC ALT (NO SAFETY FACTOR)
including alt lag
MRA FOR SAFE ESCAPE
including alt lag
MAX FRAGMENT TRAVEL
ALTITUDE
HORIZONTAL RANGE
TOF
TOF FOR DIVE RECOVERY MRA
TOF FOR SAFE ESCAPE MRA
TOF FOR FUZE ARMING/CBU FUNCTION MRA

** POINT DATA **

TGT Point
DESCRIPTION: .TARGET
LATITUDE: WN 303004
LONGITUDE: W085 59 56

MGRS: 16REJ9608474476
ELEVATION: 1000FT 305M
DATUM: AdiBurFa

IP Point
DESCRIPTION:  .IP
LATITUDE: WN 305004
LONGITUDE: W085 59 56
MGRS: 16REK9575511419
ELEVATION: OFT OM

RANGE TO TGT: 20.0NM 121521FT 37040M

BEARING: 181M To TGT
DATUM: AdiBurFa

5G Climb Maneuver

+5.0

1367FT

2548A 35438M

2500A 3500M

38867A 4867M
59438M

3910A 4910M
4984M

1867A 2367M
2436M

2512A 3512M
3583M

3258A 4258M

38752FT

30.9 SEC

2.86 SEC

4.94 SEC

7.21 SEC

AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_66.jpeg:
CWDS SAFE ESCAPE/SAFE SEPARATION TABLE
F15E PW220 W/CFT

MAX FRAG TRAVEL

MK-84 LD ALTITUDE (FT) HORIZONTAL (FT) TOF (SEC)
5G Climb Maneuver 2855 3295 28.9
OFT TDA
RELEASE SAFE ESCAPE
SINGLE RIPPLE - 2 BOMBS
30 MSEC 75 FEET 150 FEET
DIVE ALT
ANG TAS LOST MRA _ TOF MRA IMP MRA INTV | MRA _INTV
DEG KNOTS FEET FEET SEC FEET FEET | FEET MSEC | FEET MSEC
0.0 450 0 480 5.12 480 22 490 99 500 197
0.0 475 0 460 4.97 460 24 470 94 480 188
0.0 500 0 440 4.84 440 25 450 89 460 179
0.0 525 0 420 4.71 430 26 430 85 440 170
0.0 550 0 420 4.68 430 27 430 81 440 163
0.0 575 0 420 4.66 420 28 430 717 440 156
0.0 600 0 420 4.63 420 29 420 74 430 151
0.0 625 0 420 4.77 420 30 420 72 430 147
0.0 650 0 420 4.78 420 31 430 70 430 143
5.0 450 100 790 5.01 800 16 810 136 840 271
5.0 475 100 790 4.91 790 17 810 132 830 263
5.0 500 110 790 4.83 790 17 810 127 830 255
5.0 525 120 780 4.70 780 18 800 124 820 248
5.0 550 120 790 4.66 790 18 810 120 830 241
5.0 575 130 800 4.62 810 19 820 118 840 234
5.0 600 140 810 4.58 820 19 830 115 850 229
5.0 625 150 830 4.68 830 19 850 114 870 225
5.0 650 150 840 4.66 850 19 860 114 880 224
10.0 450 240 1120 5.02 1130 13 1160 174 1200 845
10.0 475 250 1110 4.85 1120 13 1150 171 1180 341
10.0 500 270 1130 4.80 1140 13 1170 167 1210 3832
10.0 525 290 1150 4.75 1150 13 1180 164 1220 326
10.0 550 310 1150 4.63 1170 14 1190 161 1230 821
10.0 575 330 1190 4.65 1200 14 1220 157 1260 314
10.0 600 350 1210 4.60 1220 14 1250 156 1290 307
10.0 625 370 1240 4.65 1250 14 1280 153 1320 302
10.0 650 400 1270 4.65 1280 14 1300 154 1340 306
15.0 450 410 1440 5.02 1460 10 1500 213 1560 422
15.0 475 450 1460 4.91 1470 11 1510 211 1570 418
15.0 500 480 1480 4.82 1490 11 1540 207 1600 411
15.0 525 520 1510 4.76 1520 11 1570 204 1630 405
15.0 550 560 1540 4.71 1550 11 1600 201 1660 399
15.0 575 600 1570 4.65 1580 11 1630 198 1690 394
15.0 600 640 1610 4.62 1630 11 1670 194 1730 388
15.0 625 680 1650 4.64 1670 11 1710 191 1770 383
15.0 650 720 1690 4.63 1700 11 1750 190 1810 382
20.0 450 630 1750 5.01 1770 9 1840 249 1920 494
20.0 475 680 1780 4.90 1790 9 1860 249 1940 493
20.0 500 740 1820 4.84 1840 9 1910 246 1990 490
20.0 525 790 1870 4.79 1890 9 1960 244 | 2040 486
20.0 550 850 1920 4.75 1930 9 2000 242 | 2090 483
20.0 575 920 1950 4.67 1970 9 2040 243 | 2120 480
20.0 600 980 | 2010 4.66 2030 9 2100 240 | 2190 473
20.0 625 1050 | 2060 4.66 2080 9 2160 238 | 2240 468
20.0 650 1110 | 2110 4.65 2130 9 2210 236 | 2290 466
AGD-3 G-4



Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_67.jpeg:
F15E PW220 W/CFT

MK-84 LD

5G Climb Maneuver

OFT TDA

RELEASE SAFE ESCAPE

SINGLE RIPPLE - 2 BOMBS
30 MSEC 75 FEET 150 FEET

DIVE ALT

ANG TAS LOST MRA _ TOF MRA IMP MRA INTV | MRA _INTV

DEG KNOTS FEET FEET SEC FEET FEET | FEET MSEC | FEET MSEC
25.0 475 950 | 2090 4.90 2100 8 2190 289 | 2290 573
25.0 500 1030 | 2150 4.85 2170 8 2270 286 | 2370 569
25.0 525 1120 | 2210 4.80 1230 8 2330 288 | 2440 568
25.0 550 1200 | 2270 4.75 2280 8 2390 288 | 2510 566
25.0 575 1290 | 2320 4.70 2340 7 2450 288 | 2570 567
25.0 600 1380 | 2390 4.68 2410 7 2530 286 | 2650 563
25.0 625 1480 | 2460 4.68 2480 7 2600 283 | 2720 559
25.0 650 1580 | 2520 4.66 2540 7 2660 281 | 2790 553
30.0 450 1150 | 2350 5.02 2370 7 2500 3827 | 2620 651
30.0 475 1260 | 2380 4.88 2390 7 2530 830 | 2670 655
30.0 500 1370 | 2470 4.86 2490 7 2620 328 | 2760 653
30.0 525 1490 | 2540 4.81 2550 7 2690 332 | 2840 652
30.0 550 1610 | 2600 4.75 2620 6 2760 3832 | 2910 654
30.0 575 1720 | 2670 4.70 2690 6 2840 832 | 3000 654
30.0 600 1840 | 2760 4.70 2780 6 2940 3832 | 3100 653
30.0 625 1960 | 2840 4.69 2870 6 3030 331 | 3200 651
30.0 650 2100 | 2920 4.69 2940 6 3110 328 | 3280 646
35.0 450 1460 | 2630 5.03 2650 6 2800 877 | 2960 739
35.0 475 1600 | 2660 4.88 2690 6 2860 880 | 3040 743
35.0 500 1750 | 2760 4.85 2780 6 2960 879 | 3140 743
35.0 525 1910 | 2840 4.80 2860 6 3040 381 | 3230 745
35.0 550 2050 | 2920 4.75 2930 6 3120 882 | 3320 748
35.0 575 2210 | 3000 4.71 3030 6 3230 883 | 3440 747
35.0 600 2360 | 3110 4.71 3140 6 3340 884 | 3560 748
35.0 625 2510 | 3210 4.71 3240 6 3450 3884 | 3670 752
35.0 650 2670 | 3300 4.71 3330 6 3550 384 | 3780 749
40.0 450 1790 | 2870 5.00 2890 5 3090 428 | 3290 838
40.0 475 1980 | 2930 4.89 2960 5 3180 431 | 3410 839
40.0 500 2170 | 3030 4.85 3060 5 3290 431 | 3510 843
40.0 525 2360 | 3120 4.79 3140 5 3380 434 | 3620 847
40.0 550 2550 | 3210 4.74 3230 5 3480 436 | 3730 850
40.0 575 2740 | 3320 4.72 3350 5 3610 436 | 3870 850
40.0 600 2930 | 3430 4.71 3470 5 3730 439 | 4010 853
40.0 625 8110 | 3550 4.71 3580 5 3860 441 | 4140 859
40.0 650 3290 | 3670 4.74 3700 5 3990 444 | 4280 864
45.0 450 2150 | 3090 4.97 3110 5 3350 488 | 3620 947
45.0 475 2380 | 3180 4.90 3210 5 3480 489 | 3760 949
45.0 500 2610 | 3290 4.85 3310 5 3600 491 | 3890 953
45.0 525 2850 | 3380 4.78 3400 4 3700 495 | 4010 959
45.0 550 3100 | 3480 4.74 3510 4 3830 496 | 4150 962
45.0 575 3330 | 3610 4.73 3640 5 3970 498 | 4300 964
45.0 600 3540 | 3740 4.72 3770 5 4110 500 | 4460 968
45.0 625 8750 | 38870 4.73 3900 5 4260 504 | 4610 977
45.0 650 3950 | 4000 4.74 4040 4 4410 508 | 4780 999
50.0 450 2530 | 3290 4.95 3300 4 3640 552 | 3970 | 1068

G-5 AGD-3



Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_68.jpeg:
F15E PW220 W/CFT

MK-84 LD
5G Climb Maneuver
OFT TDA
RELEASE SAFE ESCAPE

SINGLE RIPPLE - 2 BOMBS

30 MSEC 75 FEET 150 FEET

DIVE ALT
ANG TAS LOST MRA TOF |MRA IMP | MRA __ INTV | MRA _INTV
DEG KNOTS | FEET FEET SEC | FEET FEET| FEET MSEC | FEET MSEC
50.0 500 3100 3510 4.83 | 3540 4| 3890 559 | 4250 ae
50.0 525 3380 3610 4.77 | 3640 4| 4020 562 | 4400 1986
50.0 550 3680 3740 4.74 | 3770 4| 4170 563 | 4570 106
50.0 575 3950 +3890 4.7 | (3980) (  4)| (4410) (556) _ | (4850) erat
50.0 600 4210 4030 4.7 | (4240) (  4)| (4670) (547) | (120) ee
50.0 625 4460 4170 4.7 | (4490) (  5)| (4930) (553) | (6360) ince
50.0 650 4670 4400 4.9 | (4690) (  5)| (5150) (576) | (5590) 1090)
AGD-3 G-6



Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_69.jpeg:
CWDS BALLISTIC TABLE

A/C F15E PW220 W/CFT GROSS WEIGHT 55000
WPN MK-84 LD

DELIVERY Dive

SUSP BRU-47/A

TDA 1000 FT

DIVE RELEASE BOMB TIME SLANT IMPACT SIGHT WIND
CORRECTION

ANGLE ALT TAS RANGE OF RANGE ANGLE DEP FROM FACTORS
ABOVE FALL FLIGHT H/T CROSS
TGT PATH DRIFT
DEG FT KTS FT SEC FT DEG MILS MILS/KT FT/KT
20 3500 450 6052 8.63 6991 38 176 1.0 15
20 3500 500 6367 8.19 7266 36 155 0.9 14
20 3500 550 6633 7.78 7499 34 138 0.8 13
20 4000 450 £6678 9.54 7785 39 192 1.1 16
20 4000 500 7043 9.07 8100 37 168 0.9 15
20 4000 550 7354 8.65 8371 35 150 0.8 15
20 4500 450 7274 10.40 8553 41 206 1.1 18
20 4500 500 7688 9.92 8908 38 181 0.9 17
20 4500 550 8043 9.47 9216 37 162 0.8 16
30 3500 450  ##ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
30 3500 500 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
30 3500 550 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
30 4000 450 _5048 7.83 6441 45 148 1.3 13
00 5249 1.1

0 4000 0 nhHOR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
30 4500 450 5544 8.61 7140 46 159 1.3 15
30 4500 500 5778 8.09 7323 44 139 1.1 14
30 4500 550 5968 7.63 7474 42 123 1.0 13
40 3500 450 ##ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 3500 500 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 3500 550 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 4000 450 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 4000 500 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 4000 550 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.
40 4500 450 4191 7.38 6150 52 124 1.5 12
40 4500 500 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.

40 4500 550 ERROR: Failed to meet fuze arming criteria.

G-7 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
BOMBING TERMS AND RELATIONSHIPS

There is much more to the bombing problem than just pointing the aircraft at
the target and releasing the bomb. To establish the picture, it helps to know
and understand the terms and relationships which exist in the basic bombing
problem. Even if you never perform a manual delivery, this background in
the bombing problem should help you improve your preflight planning and
your range scores.

Time of Fall

The time of fall (TOF) of a bomb is simply the time from release to impact.
TOF is determined by aircraft altitude, dive angle, and airspeed at bomb
release; ejection velocity; gravity; and bomb drag. This time is most
important to you when determining fuze arm times and minimum release
altitudes. The TOF value for a given set of delivery parameters is found in
ballistic tables and is given in seconds. Though difficult to compute, this time
is the basis for the rest of the ballistic computations. For a level delivery of a
dragless bomb, TOF can be calculated by the formula:

2h
g

t=

where
t = TOF
h = distance of fall
g = gravity (32.2 ft/sec’)

D-1 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_70.jpeg:
CWDS ERROR ANALYSIS OUTPUT

A/C F15E PW220 W/CFT

WPN MK-84 LD

DELIVERY Dive

SUSP BRU-47/A

TDA 1000 FT

ACFT GROSS WEIGHT 55000

INTENDED) DIVE ANGLE: sssccsverseessveseccourerceereversecarererevesvsoncerseeeenesys 30

INTENDED RELEASE ALTITUDE... eee ceeeeeeeeees 3910A 4910M

INTENDED RELEASE AIRSPEED 0.0.0... cece eect eeeeeeeeees 470C 500T .77M
DIVE RELEASE ALT RELEASE A/S ERROR
ANGLE MSL AGL KCAS KTAS MACH
25 4410 3410 463 490 0.75 132 FT SHORT
25 4410 3410 473 500 0.77 74 FT SHORT
25 4410 3410 482 510 0.78 20 FT SHORT
25 4910 3910 460 490 0.75 3823 FT SHORT
25 4910 3910 470 500 0.77 256 FT SHORT
25 4910 3910 479 510 0.78 191 FT SHORT
25 5410 4410 457 490 0.75 542 FT SHORT
25 5410 4410 467 500 0.77 464 FT SHORT
25 5410 4410 476 510 0.79 390 FT SHORT
30 4410 3410 463 490 0.75 66 FT LONG
30 4410 3410 473 500 0.77 108 FT LONG
30 4410 3410 482 510 0.78 147 FT LONG
30 4910 3910 460 490 0.75 50 FT SHORT
30 4910 3910 470 500 0.77 ON TARGET
30 4910 3910 479 510 0.78 47 FT LONG
30 5410 4410 457 490 0.75 188 FT SHORT
30 5410 4410 467 500 0.77 129 FT SHORT
30 5410 4410 476 510 0.79 74 FT SHORT
35 4410 3410 463 490 0.75 174 FT LONG
35 4410 3410 473 500 0.77 207 FT LONG
35 4410 3410 482 510 0.78 236 FT LONG
35 4910 3910 460 490 0.75 106 FT LONG
35 4910 3910 470 500 0.77 146 FT LONG
35 4910 3910 479 510 0.78 182 FT LONG
35 5410 4410 457 490 0.75 22 FT LONG
35 5410 4410 467 500 0.77 69 FT LONG
35 5410 4410 476 510 0.79 110 FT LONG

AGD-3 G-8


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_71.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

G-9 AGD-3


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_72.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_8.jpeg:
Bomb Range

Bomb range (Figure D-1) is simply the horizontal distance a bomb travels
during its time of fall. Without drag, range is equal to the horizontal
component of true airspeed at release multiplied by the bomb time of fall.
The bomb range for a given set of delivery parameters can be found in
ballistic tables and is given in feet. The bombing problem is determining
when your range to the target is equal to the current bomb range. Any
variation in release velocity, dive angle, or altitude affects bomb range and
delivery accuracy.

<———80mB RANGE > BOMB TRAIL——>|

AGD-03-01

Figure D - 1. Bomb Range and Bomb Trail.

AGD-3 D-2


Text from AGD-3_Basic_Bombing_page_9.jpeg:
Bomb Trail

Bomb trail (Figure D-1) reflects the drag effect in bomb range. Because a
bomb has drag, it begins to lose forward speed as soon as it is released and
begins to lag behind the aircraft. The distance a bomb lags behind the
delivery aircraft is called bomb trail. This value is not directly computed nor
is it given in Dash 34 tables. The higher the drag and the longer the TOF of
a bomb, the larger its bomb trail.

To calculate bomb trail, subtract bomb range from average aircraft velocity
(in ft/sec) times bomb TOF.

bomb trail = (aircraft velocity x bomb TOF) — (bomb range)

Ballistic Trajectory

Ballistic trajectory is the path of a munition from release to impact. This
trajectory is the result of release velocity, release angle, release height above
the target, gravity, and weapon drag characteristics.

Mil (Milliradian)

Mil is a term commonly used as an abbreviation for milliradian (1/1000 of a
radian). A radian is a unit of plane angular measurement equal to the angle
at the center of a circle subtended by an arc equal in length to the radius of
the circle. Since the circumference of a circle is equal to 27 times the radius,
there are 27, or 6.283, radians (6283 milliradians) in a complete circle. Since
a circle with a radius of 1000 feet has a circumference of 6283 feet

(c = 2x x 1000 = 6283), each milliradian subtends one foot at a range of

1000 feet. The relationship of milliradians to degrees is:

1 mil = et 0.0573°
6283

17.453 mils = 1°

D-3 AGD-3


