Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY
AGD-4
DESIGNATIONS

JANUARY 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_10.jpeg:
It is recommended that the EGI be used as the primary PPKS. The EGI
position, velocity, and altitude outputs are taken into the position/velocity
consistency (PVC) filter in the CC. The PVC filter provides stable and
consistent data which is used for navigation, steering, and weapon
delivery. The FNU INS will continue to provide the primary attitude,
heading, attitude rate, and accelerations to the CC.

NOTE: The remaining text refers to aircraft before EGI unless
noted at that paragraph.

Coordinate Transformations

In processing information for the various avionics systems, several
reference/coordinate systems are used (e.g., earth coordinates, aircraft
coordinates). For the various systems to talk back and forth, any spatial
point of interest must be known relative to each of the frames of reference.
This function is accomplished by the MN.

Symbol Placement/Steering

When INS is the selected PP source, the MN PP is used only to place A/G
radar and TGT IR display symbology during A/G radar or TGT IR position
updates and A/G weapon(s) release steering/cues. When MN is the
selected PP source, MN PP is used to position all navigation symbology on
the HUD, TSD, A/A and A/G radar, TGT IR, TEWS/EADI/EHSI, and for
UFC navigation information.

Sensor Pointing

As in the case of symbol placement, the CC uses the present position of
the PP keeping source to point sensors (A/G radar, TGT IR) at specific
points of interest. Once a target is designated, all weapon(s) release
symbology is based on MN present position, regardless of the PP keeping
source.

AGD-4 D-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_11.jpeg:
Target Designation

Target designation is nothing more than identifying to the A/G module
[weapon(s) release program] that a particular CC-stored sequence point
(usually a target) has been chosen to receive your load of iron. The MN
gets the job because it is the most accurate short-term navigator if it is
properly updated (position and velocities). Although a stored target or
target offset is normally used for the target designation, the system is
capable of bombing other sequence points (steer points, aim points, base,
mark points) or locations not stored in the CC (targets of opportunity).

Requirement for Designation

Normally, there are many sequence points stored in the CC (base, steer
points, aim points, targets, target offsets, mark points, bullseye points,
avoidance points). Although the system allows us to bomb targets of
opportunity, we normally identify (with target syntax) those points on
which we anticipate the need to employ air-to-ground ordnance.
Additionally, at any given time, the A/G radar cursor, TGT IR cursor,
HUD reticle, and current aircraft sequence point may all be different
geographic locations. In order to employ our computed weapons delivery
modes [AUTO and continuously displayed impact point (CDIP)] we must
identify to the CC our intent to release weapons and where we want those
weapons to impact. This process is referred to as target designation. Only
after target designation do we obtain weapons delivery information
(versus simply navigation information) on the HUD and the ability to
release weapons via the AUTO or CDIP weapons delivery modes.

Once a designation has occurred, it is presented on various cockpit
displays. This can be an aid to visually identify the target. With most
designation methods the target pod is pointed to the target location to
further refine the designation.

The act of designation always occurs before the bombs are released for

computed deliveries. For CDIP this may be a very short period of time,
but can be a long time (minutes) for some auto deliveries.

D-5 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_12.jpeg:
Definitions

Designation Triangle

In order to put bombs on the target with the F-15E, the first task is to
have the most accurate designation possible. Once a designation is
obtained, the system (MN) will use the information it has to figure all
parts of the designation triangle (Figure D-2). It is important to note that
it can be a single shot computation or can be updated frequently during
the bombing run.

The three sides of the triangle are known as height above target (HAT),
slant range (SR) to the target, and ground range (GR) to the target. The
angle between the aircraft INS horizon and the line of sight of the sensor
to the designation is referred to as the graze angle. With any two of these
four values known, the computer is able to calculate the remaining values.
Of particular interest are the HAT and ground range which are used for
weapons ballistics computations.

GRAZE ANGLE

GROUND RANGE

MEAN SEA LEVEL

AGD-04-02

Figure D - 2. Designation Triangle.

AGD-4 D-6


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_13.jpeg:
Definitions (Altitudes/Elevations)

There are several altitude/elevation terms that we must understand
during any discussion of target designations (and air-to-ground weapons
delivery). The definitions are important because they represent separate
means of altitude information needed by the MN to determine where to
place the target vertically (Z coordinate) when we designate and to
determine our aircraft’s location-to-target vertical relationship during
sensor cueing and computed weapons deliveries.

Target Elevation (Ht)

Ht is entered by the aircrew during route construction through the DTM
or manually on the UFC point data submenu. List points can transfer Ht.
Alternately, Ht is calculated by the navigation module during the
designation process.

Steer Point Elevation (Hsp)

Hsp is a stored sequence point altitude as entered by the aircrew during
route construction (DTM, list point transfer, or manually through the
UFC). Hsp and Ht can be synonymous, but are not necessarily so.

System Altitude (Hsys)

System altitude is ADC corrected pressure altitude smoothed by the CC
using INS vertical velocities. It is not necessarily the same as MSL
altitude as read on the HUD and ADI. System altitude is always
measured/calculated by the NAV module and cannot be entered directly
by the aircrew. The aircrew resets the system altitude during preflight
ground operations so that the system altitude is the same as the elevation
(MSL) of the ground under the aircraft. The aircrew then updates the
system altitude using overfly freeze position updates, overfly freeze
altitude updates over a known point or flat surface, and TGT IR updates
(position and altitude, or altitude only). HUD or A/G radar updates do not
update system altitude.

D-7 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_14.jpeg:
It is extremely important to ensure accurate system altitude as it is the
primary altitude/elevation source for some types of designations and is
always a default/backup altitude/elevation source for all methods of
designation and all computed weapons deliveries. One point to remember
is that a CC reset (CC reset button or CC ground power switch) rejects
your system altitude update, and a subsequent system altitude update
before designating targets and dropping bombs is highly advised.

Height Above Target (HAT)

HAT is the true altitude of the aircraft above the target. It is one of the
pieces of information used by the mission NAV to provide steering to the
designated target. It is also a critical bit of information used by the A/G
module (ballistics computer) to figure the computed release range of the
weapons selected.

Height Above Ground (HAG)

HAG is also a true altitude above the ground, always computed in the
central computer and used for updates in the course of the flight. This is
also used by the ballistics computer if an undesignated CDIP delivery is
attempted.

Designation Sources Versus Ranging/Altitude Sources

There are a variety of methods to designate targets. Each of these
methods has a variety of possible sources of determining where the target
is, in range/elevation relative to the aircraft, and when the
aircraft-to-target relationship matches the computed ballistics of the
selected weapons. The designation methods include NAV, A/G radar, TGT
IR and several visual methods utilizing the A/G HUD symbology. Possible
methods of determining range to target and/or our aircraft’s height above
target (HAT) include laser ranging (LAS) through the TGT IR pod, high
resolution map (HRM) ranging, air-to-ground radar ranging (AGR),
passive ranging from TGT IR pod pointing angles (PASS), radar altitude
(RALT), and aircraft system altitude (SYS). Not all designation methods
are created equal—some are more accurate than others. Neither are all
ranging/altitude sources created equal.

AGD-4 D-8


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_15.jpeg:
SYS (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

SYS is the means of using Hsys to compute target elevation and aircraft
height above target (HAT) for target designations and weapons delivery.
This method can be the primary means for computing HAT, and is always
a backup means. It is compatible with all designation methods.

SYS (After TCTO 1F-15E-737)

SYSG: With EGI as the PPKS, the system altitude (SYSG) is the EGI
blended altitude combined with the blended vertical velocity by the
position/velocity consistency filter in the CC.

SYSB: For other PPKS selections, the system altitude (SYSB) is
temperature corrected pressure altitude.

Radar Altitude (RALT)

RALT is the means of computing target elevation for target designations
and/or HAT using inputs from the radar altimeter. It is only used if
included in the manual hierarchy as programmed by the aircrew and only
if the manual (versus auto) hierarchy is selected by the aircrew. RALT is
only used if the aircraft attitude is less than 60° of bank and pitch. RALT
is compatible with all designation methods, but is usually programmed as
a backup, versus primary, source. When RALT is used, HAT is computed
as HAT = RALT. Obviously, RALT would not be a good source of HAT if
the approach to the target/computed weapon(s) release point was over
changing terrain elevation or terrain elevation differed from the target
elevation. RALT will not be used for a NAV or A/G radar designation for
computing target elevation. However, it can be used for computing HAT
once the aircraft reaches 15 seconds to weapon(s) release (15 TREL) ona
target designated with a NAV or radar designation.

D-9 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_16.jpeg:
Air-to-Ground Ranging (AGR)

AGR is the method of computing target elevation during target
designations and HAT for weapons delivery using A/G radar slant range.
AGR is available for use if the aircrew selects the auto sensor hierarchy
(LAS, AGR, SYS—in that order of precedence), and is available if
programmed into the manual hierarchy. AGR is compatible with all
designation methods and can be slaved to the target designation (HUD TD
diamond), to the TGT IR pod LOS, to the AUTO delivery mode pipper or
to the CDIP delivery mode pipper.

Even if included in the selected hierarchy (AUTO/MAN), AGR inputs will
not be used if the radar antenna elevation is not depressed at least -1.25°.
The system does not want to use unreliable information from shallower
radar graze angles.

AGR is commanded automatically when the CC determines that a slant
range measurement is required. During any designated AUTO weapons
delivery a slant range measurement is required for the last 15 seconds
prior to computed weapon(s) release. Just like RALT, AGR will not be
used to determine target elevation during a NAV or radar designation but
it can be used to determine HAT once 15 TREL is reached.

The CC commands the radar to AGR at the target pod LOS, providing
ranging for TGT IR designations and weapons deliveries:

e@ when the target pod cursor function TGT (or UPDT) is selected,
e AGR is included in the selected hierarchy,
e the aircrew is in command of the TGT IR, and

e laser range is not available, not valid, or above LAS in the manual
hierarchy.

The AGR value can then be used for computing target elevation for
designations and HAT for weapons delivery calculations.

When the pilot takes command of the HUD and the target pod laser is not
firing, the CC commands the radar to provide AGR to the HUD. In AUTO
bombing mode AGR is provided to the designated target or to the AUTO
pipper if there is no designated target. In CDIP bombing mode, AGR is
always to the CDIP pipper (with or without a target designation).

AGD-4 D-10


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_17.jpeg:
In summary, AGR slant range can be used to compute HAT following a
NAV or A/G radar target designation and can be used for target
designation/HAT computations for TGT IR and AUTO/CDIP pipper
designations.

Since some sensors could provide unreliable data for use in slant
range/HAT data, the CC performs sanity and/or validity checks to
determine whether the sensor-provided information should be used.
Before AGR is used, the following conditions must be satisfied to assess
the AGR as valid.

e AGR grazing angle must be kept at or greater than 1.25°.

e The designated target during designated AUTO weapons deliveries
must be within the radar antenna gimbal limits.

e The computed range from AGR must be within -10,000/+15,000 feet
of the designated target position as calculated by the CC (MN) during
designated AUTO weapons deliveries from a NAV or A/G radar
designation.

LASER Ranging (LAS)

LAS is the means of using LASER slant range for computing target
range/elevation and/or HAT for target designations and computed
weapons deliveries using the TGT IR laser. LAS can be used for TGT IR
and HUD designations, and for weapons delivery computations from these
designations. It is the first priority sensor if AUTO sensor hierarchy is
selected on the A/G delivery display and can be included, at aircrew
discretion, in MAN sensor hierarchy, programmed using the A/G delivery
display.

Laser sensor validity checks are applied for HUD designations only. The
sensor fails the check if the target pod is not actively slaved to the:

e designated target (for designated AUTO weapons deliveries).
e AUTO pipper for undesignated AUTO weapons deliveries.

e CDIP pipper for all CDIP (designated or undesignated) weapons
deliveries.

D-11 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_18.jpeg:
If the auto sensor hierarchy is selected or if the manual sensor hierarchy
is selected and includes LAS, when the pilot takes command of the HUD a
second time, the TGT IR LOS (and hence the laser) is slaved to the HUD.
It is slaved to the TD diamond (if a target is designated) or to the
AUTO/CDIP pipper if there is no target designation (undesignated
AUTO/CDIP).

PASS (Passive Ranging)

Target elevation and HAT are computed using TGT IR pod pointing
angles and line of sight rates (trigonometric calculations) without using
any of the other altitude or ranging sources. It is compatible only with
TGT IR designations.

HRM

HAT is computed using TGT IR pod pointing angles and ranging from a
HRM patch map. It is utilized only for TGT IR pod designations, which
follow an A/G radar patch map designation.

Designation Methods

There are six methods which can be used to designate a target. They are
NAV, radar, TGT IR, AUTO pipper, CDIP pipper, and zero point. The
flow on a typical mission would be to plan for each type as you get closer
to the target. There is a time/distance relationship with the target for
each. A NAV designation can be done at any distance. The radar
designation will be done inside radar range, typically less than 30 nm. A
target pod designation would typically be planned at 8-5 nm from the
target. The pipper designation inside visual range to target, 4-1 nm. In
this context a zero point could be used as a reattack option. In general
terms the accuracy of the designation will also improve as you move down
the list, with the exception of zero point which is mechanically the same as
a NAV designation. Another important relationship that exists is the fact
that each of the first five will “overwrite” any of the previous designations
on the list. For example, a TGT IR will overwrite a NAV or radar, but not
an AUTO or CDIP pipper designation. A description of each method is
presented later in the text.

AGD-4 D-12


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_19.jpeg:
Range/Altitude Source Hierarchy

Hierarchies of the range/altitude sources to be used may be programmed/
selected by the aircrew utilizing the A/G delivery (A/G DLVRY)
MPD/MPCD display format (more later in this text on mechanics). The
aircrew may choose to use either the auto hierarchy or manual hierarchy.
The auto selection allows only LAS, AGR and SYS to be used, in that
order of precedence. The manual selection allows the aircrew to build the
hierarchy with only one or as many as all six range/altitude sources
included. One constraint is that SYS must always be included.
Remember, regardless of the sensor hierarchy selected (AUTO or MAN)
the range/altitude sources will only be used if they are compatible with
the current designation method.

Finally, not all ranging/altitude sources are available/compatible with all
designation sources/methods. Figure D-3 shows which range/altitude
sources are compatible with each designation method.

HUD
(AUTO/CDIP PIPPER OR TD)

A/G RADAR

AGD-04-03

Figure D - 3. Designation Sources Versus Range/Altitude Sources.

D-13 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGD-4, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_20.jpeg:
A/G DELIVERY DISPLAYS
A/G Delivery (A/G DLVRY) Display

The A/G delivery display (A/G DLVRY) MPD/MPCD format is used to
select/program a variety of target designation/weapons delivery functions.
A/G DLVRY is selected from display Menu 2 (Figure D-4).

(oe ee es

vib2 Mc/ VIDS. —s HUD
or pRoe A/G DLVRY

SUU20 SUUZI
WIND TBDU33 TBDU33
MODEL PAGE

LOFT 30° AT— 38
TARM6.5SEC MLAS 0:12 CT R 130°

AUTOPRIOR = STATUS

2] AGR
BE] sys

fe}
9g
q

Ha

AIG
DLVRY

SYSB 12384'
WIND 270°/023
TIME 15:30:20

Tall COLO!

OO
fle

AUTO STEP

watene [AGceT] = [PY

é

AGD-04-04

MENU 2 | DLVRY DISPLAY

Figure D - 4. A/G DLVRY Display.

The selections input by the aircrew on the A/G ARMT (PACS) display are
visually repeated on the A/G DLVRY display format. Generally, the
selections can be programmed through the DTM or input manually. Most
of the inputs are tied to a specific A/G PACS weapons delivery program
(PROG 1-4). By changing the PACS PROG, the aircrew also selects the
A/G DLVRY parameters tied to that program. The following discusses
A/G DLVRY display options.

e RET XXX, PB #2: Provides entry (through the UFC scratchpad) of a
reticle depression angle (mils) for use in noncomputed (direct or
manual) bombing. The manual or direct HUD reticle will be
depressed from the aircraft flight path by the value set (0 through
250 mils).

AGD-4 D-14


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_21.jpeg:
e Minimum Recovery Altitude (MRA), PB #3: Values of 0 through
50,000, in one foot intervals, can be set using a UFC scratchpad
entry. The entry will provide HUD cues that can be used to
deconflict from the weapons effects (fragmentation envelope) of
ownship or other aircraft A/G weapons.

e PROG (1-4), PB #5: Pressing the button will cycle through the four
PACS weapons delivery programs.

The PACS program parameters (delivery mode, release sequencing,
fuzing) and the PACS selections for A/A CBT or TNG and A/G CBT or
TNG are reflected at the bottom of the display. (These selections can only
be made from a PACS display.) The current aircraft master mode
selection is boxed. Current aircraft system altitude, current winds and
current CC clock time are also displayed. The |RDY | mimics the status
on the A/G PACS display.

Across the top of the display are the loaded store legends and quantities.
The store legends are boxed only if they are selected on the A/G PACS
display (selection/deselection can only be accomplished from A/G PACS
display).

The data below the stations (LOFT, TARM, MLAS, AT, CT, etc.) mimic
values programmed on a separate A/G delivery program (A/G DLVRY
PROG) display, which is addressed later in this workbook.

The programmed/selected sensor hierarchy (AUTO or MAN)/status is
depicted in the center of the display. The sensor currently being used for
HAT calculations is boxed. The selection of the auto or manual sensor
hierarchy is made at PB #18. The manual hierarchy can only be
programmed/changed on a separate A/G DLVRY PROG display format.

D-15 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_22.jpeg:
A/G Delivery Program (A/G DLVRY PROG) Display

The A/G DLVRY PROG display format is accessed by pressing PB #1 on
the A/G DLVRY display format (Figure D-5).

A/G DLVRY LAS HRM AGR PASS — RALT

2
|_||[PROG
PAGE

LOFT
30°

SUU20 SUU20
PROG 1BDU33 1 BDU33
PAGE

LOFT 30° T- 38"
TARM6.5SEC MLAS 0:12 CT R 130"
AUTOPRIOR STATUS
2] GR
B] sys

A/G DLVRY PROG

MAN PRIOR = STATUS.
VAL
AT 2] HRM VAL
38 AGR SAN
PASS VAL
RALT OFF
sys VAL

a

cT
SYSB 12384' R130'
WIND 270°/023

TIME 15:30:20

PIS

AUTO STEP
AIA TRNG A/G CBT TARM MLAS
6.5 SEC CONT

a ee ee at, | | |
SIMIPIEP ~ EIIEIE|
A/G DLVRY DISPLAY A/G DLVRY PROG DISPLAY

AGD-04-05

Figure D - 5. A/G DLVRY and A/G DLVRY PROG Display.

Sens ||

Toggling PB #1 alternately selects the two formats (A/G DLVRY and A/G
DLVRY PROG). The PB #1 legend (PROG PAGE) is boxed when the
PROG DISPLAY is the currently viewed format.

The A/G DLVRY PROG display is mechanized as follows.

e Data displayed adjacent to PB #2 (LOFT XX), PB #3 (AT), PB #4
(CT), PB #6 (TARM XX.X), PB #7 (DGR), and PB #8 (MLAS) are
associated with the weapon program at PB #5 and its associated
weapon as programmed on the A/G PACS. Ifa weapon is not selected
(boxed) on the A/G PACS display for the particular program, then the
legends are blank. If any legend parameters are not available for the
selected weapon, the appropriate PB legend is blank. After
programming, the option values are mimicked on both the A/G PACS
display and the A/G DLVRY display (for that program) (PROG 1-4).

AGD-4 D-16


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_23.jpeg:
Loft Angle, PB #2: With a blank UFC scratchpad, pressing PB #2
toggles between LOFT XX and LOFT MAX. With LOFT XX selected,
a value (0-45) can be entered through the UFC scratchpad. The CC
computes a maximum range loft weapon(s) release or a loft weapon(s)
release using the loft angle selected. HUD cues include a time to pull
(TPULL XX) and an elevation steering bar to enable the aircrew to
execute the desired loft weapons delivery profile. The HUD cues are
only available if LOFT MAX or an angle greater than 5° is
programmed.

Along Track (AT) Bias (PB #8) and/or Cross Track (CT) Bias (PB #4):
The aircrew can adjust the impact point for ballistic weapons. Values
for each PACS PROG can be entered via a UFC scratchpad entry at
PB #3/PB #4. Toggling PB #3/PB #4 allows biases to be entered
(utilizing the UFC scratchpad) in mils or in feet. A negative [UFC
shift (-)] value moves the computed weapons impact short or left. No
sign signifies a long or right bias to the CC-computed impact point.
Values that can be entered are -9999 to +9999 feet or -50 to +50 mils.

Cycling PB #5 selects the PACS weapons delivery program that the
aircrew influences with the A/G DLVRY PROG inputs.

TARM, PB #6: A UFC scratchpad entry (0 through 99.9) enters a
weapon time to arm after release from the aircraft. If a decimal is
not manually entered, it is automatically entered before the right
most displayed entry. The aircrew entry should agree with the time
fuze set on the weapon, itself. The entry enables HUD cues (“DUD”)
which signify that under current conditions, the weapon(s), if
released, will have insufficient arming time and will impact
unarmed.

Desired Ground Range (DGR), PB #7: As with the other pushbutton
legends, this one is only displayed when applicable for the weapon
type associated with the PB #5 selected PROG (from the PACS A/G
display). DGR is only available for GBU-24 or GBU-28 employment.
Allowable values are 0 through 99,999 feet. GBU-24/-28 and DGR
are beyond the scope of our discussion.

D-17 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_24.jpeg:
e Auto Lase (ALAS)/Manual Lase (MLAS), PB #8: Toggling the button
alternates between ALAS X:XX (or ALAS CONT) and MLAS X:XX (or
MLAS CONT). UFC scratchpad entries of time or C (for continuous)
influence the displayed values. Time values allowed depend on the
type of weapon selected for the PACS PROG (GBU-10/-12/-24/-28).
This feature can also be used for SUU-20 employment (simulating
GBU employment). For SUU-20, valid entries are from one second
(0:01) to one minute, thirty seconds (1:30). If a colon is entered, two
digits must be entered after the colon or the display will not accept
the UFC scratchpad entry.

e SYS, RALT, PASS, AGR, HRM, LAS, PBs #15 through #20: These
buttons allow the aircrew to build a hierarchy of aircraft sensors to be
used in providing/computing slant range (SLR), height above target
(HAT), or height above ground (HAG) which will be utilized during
arriving at a weapon(s) release solution. Pressing PBs #15 through
#20 allows assignment of a hierarchy sequence number. If a
sequence number is already displayed, pressing the button removes
the number. The smallest unused sequence number is assigned to
the applicable sensor.

e CLEAR (PB #14): Pressing PB #14 removes all sequence numbers
adjacent to the sensor legends at PBs #15 through #20.

e AUTO/MAN, PB #13: Pressing PB #13 toggles between MAN and
AUTO sensor hierarchy. This determines the hierarchy that is
displayed in the center of the A/G PROG display format, either
AUTO or MAN. The sequence displayed will be utilized for target
designation and weapons delivery, given that the sensor information
is available (and in some cases valid) and compatible with the
designation method.

e ENTER, PB #10: Pressing PB #10 enters the sensors selected at
PBs #15 through #20 into the manual sensor hierarchy. If MAN is
selected at PB #18, the center of the display reflects the entered
hierarchy. If a sensor is not assigned a sequence number, it does not
appear in the display hierarchy. With AUTO selected, only LAS,
AGR or SYS are displayed in the hierarchy.

AGD-4 D-18


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_25.jpeg:
The sensor hierarchy selection (MAN or AUTO) that will actually be used
during weapons delivery is that selected on the A/G DLVRY (not the A/G
DLVRY PROG) display.

The center of the display (both the A/G DLVRY display and the

A/G DLVRY PROG display) also shows sensor status as VAL (valid), SAN
(valid, but not passing sanity checks), or OFF (not passing validity or
sanity checks). TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 provides explanations of validity and
sanity.

A/G HUD

The following discussion does not include all possible HUD symbology.
The HUD depictions are simplified to show only the symbology that is
germane to this lesson. A full description of AUTO/CDIP HUD weapons
employment symbology will follow in the Computed Bombing Modes
workbook and lecture.

NAV/INST Master Mode

In the NAV/INST master mode (Figure D-6), the HUD depicts steering
(wind-corrected) to the current aircraft sequence point (NAV 4.A) utilizing
a bank steering bar and a command heading bug. The data block depicts
the current aircraft sequence point (4.A), the slant range (N5.0) and the
ETE or ETA to the sequence point. If the sequence point is within the
HUD FOV, it is depicted as a LOS circle. All the above assumes NAV
steering is selected on the HSI.

The NAV/INST master mode HUD remains essentially the same,

regardless of the PACS status and/or whether or not a target is
designated. (The gun cross is visible if the master arm is in ARM).

D-19 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_26.jpeg:
36° 36 "1
ny Vn Sa

15 —

+ 10 —
480 -—— - {— 2500 -
x 8.3 O

G 480

R 450
5L-- -~45

IN CMD

NAV 4.A
10L—- -~110 N 5.0
12:30:05A

15L-——- —-~115

AGD-04-06
Figure D - 6. HUD (NAV MM) (With or Without a Target
Designation PACS RDY or not RDY).

AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_27.jpeg:
With A/G MM selected and no target designation, the display with an auto
program selected is shown in Figure D-7. The ETE/ETA HUD window is

blank and the current aircraft sensor is displayed on line four of the data

block.

38° 3601
15 —
10 —

+
780 —C)— -
5 —

oC 8.3
G 480 R 450

5L-- --i5

NAV 4.A
10--- --10 NN 5.0

IN CMD

RALT

15L—— -—-115

AGD-04-07

Figure D - 7. A/G MM With AUTO PACS Delivery Mode (no
Designation).

In A/G master mode with a RDY on the PACS, but with no designation,
the current (AUTO or CDIP) delivery mode appears on line four of the

data block. (Otherwise, it is just like Figure D-7.)

AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_28.jpeg:
In A/G master mode with a RDY PACS and a designated target

(Figures D-8 and D-9), the LOS cue is replaced by a HUD TD diamond.
The data block changes from NAV 7.A to TGT 7.A (and G5.0 versus N5.0).
In the AUTO mode, an azimuth steering line (ASL) is visible. The ASL
provides steering to wind-corrected weapon(s) release point (versus to the
NAV point).

a Cane
-O-
x 8.3

©

§L-- -~15

R 450

11200
TCT 4A
10+ —— ~~+110 G 17
0:10 TREL
AUTO LAS

15-—— —~115

AGD-04-08

Figure D - 8. Designated AUTO (AUTO Delivery Mode With a Target
Designated).

AGD-4 D - 22


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_29.jpeg:
15L—— -—415

AGD-04-09

Figure D - 9. Designated CDIP (CDIP Delivery Mode With a Target
Designated).

In short, to obtain HUD PACS cues and target designation cues/steering,
A/G MM needs to be selected. Whether CDIP or AUTO is the current
delivery mode is obvious from the presentation [pipper at the velocity
vector for AUTO; pipper suspended from the velocity vector by a displayed
impact line (DIL) in CDIP]. Along with a PACS RDY light, the
AUTO/CDIP legend in the HUD data block is a visible indication that the
PACS is RDY. The best cues to determine that a target designation has
occurred are the “TGT” versus “NAV” in the data block, the ASL (in AUTO
PACS mode) and the TD diamond (versus LOS circle) if the designated
target is within the HUD FOV.

D - 23 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY

y

COVER

DESIGNATIONS

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to target designation capabilities and
procedures.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 000. eecccceseceeseeceseeeeesaeecesaeesensaeessseeeensaeesesnaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 000... eeeeeeeeeeeenees C-1
TEXT oc eeccccccessseecceesseeeecessseeecesesaeeeceesssaeeeseesssaeeesesssaeeeseeeeaaeeseee D-1
END QF TEXT QUID sssis cass sass snore sexe cons ones sass snivs seve sete mens suns suns suns sere ens aes auiws oes E-1
GLOSSARY. ee eeceeesecessneecesseeecesaeecesaeecessaeecesaeeseesaeecesaaesessaeeseeaeeeneas F-1

A-1 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_30.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Prior to target designation, the MN present position is used by the
CC to position all aircraft navigation steering information and
navigation sequence point symbology

if either INS or MN is selected as the PP keeping source.
only if MN is selected as the PP keeping source.

only if NAV master mode is selected.

only if NAV steer mode is selected on the HSI.

pe op

2. LASER ranging can be used to accomplish the following types of

designations.

a. All six designation methods

b. NAV and A/G radar only

c. TGTIR and HUD designations
d. Only TGT IR designations

3. The manual range/altitude sensor hierarchy is programmed through
the DTM or manually utilizing the

a. PACS A/G load display.

b. A/G delivery display.

c. UFC.

d. A/G delivery program display.

4. With AUTO range/altitude sensor hierarchy selected on the
A/G delivery display, the following sensor priority is established.

a. LAS, AGR, RALT, SYS, HRM, PASS.
b. AGR, SYS, LAS.
c. LAS, AGR, SYS.
d. LAS, SYS, AGR.

5. It is not important to ensure the target sequence point elevation is
correct, as the system will use its sensors to determine HAT.

a. True
b. False

AGD-4 D - 24


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_31.jpeg:
The selection of which (AUTO or MAN) sensor hierarchy that the CC
will actually use for range/altitude information during designations
and computed weapons deliveries is made on the

UFC.

A/G delivery display.

A/G delivery program display.

A/G delivery display or A/G delivery program display.

Boop

Designated target position and steering to an A/G weapon(s) release
point are displayed on the HUD

a. in NAV or A/G master modes as long as a target is designated
and the PACS is ready.
. only in A/G master mode with a PACS ready.
c. only in A/G master mode, but even without a PACS ready.
d. only with a PACS ready, even if no target is designated.

A good cue that a target is designated is the HUD data block
displaying TGT X., versus NAV X.

a. True
b. False

A valid HUD cue that the PACS is in a ready condition for a
computed weapons delivery (CDIP or AUTO) is

TGT (versus NAV) in the HUD data block.
AUTO or CDIP legend in the HUD data block.
a gun cross.

an AUTO or CDIP reticle displayed.

Ro op

D - 25 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_32.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. b
2. ¢
3. d
4. ¢
5. b
6. b
Te f
8. a
9. b

AGD-4 D - 26


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_33.jpeg:
DESIGNATION DESCRIPTIONS

This section examines the six methods of target designation (NAV, A/G
radar, TGT IR, AUTO pipper, CDIP pipper and zero point). Some of the
methods are very similar to others, some require visual flight conditions,
some are easier to accomplish than others, and some methods provide
better accuracy than others. The following section describes how each
method works, how to designate using each of the methods, and the
pitfalls associated with each.

NAV Designation

This designation method is not dependent on data outside the CC. It is
virtually automatic and provides a means of designating a target with
little crew effort. It provides no better accuracy than the MN NAV
steering; however it identifies to the CC that weapons delivery on the
target sequence point is intended, and provides HUD steering cues (and
weapons delivery information cues) to a weapon(s) release point rather
than to the target sequence point, itself.

Description

The NAV module recognizes crew-entered sequence point data (lat/long,
elev) as belonging to a target by its syntax (xx.). With the A/G master
mode selected, when the system sequences (automatically or manually) to
a target sequence point, the NAV module retrieves the stored target data
and the MN present position. With the two sets of coordinates, the NAV
module is able to calculate the location of the target (X, Y, Z coordinates).

Normally, the target elevation is entered and stored along with the
coordinates. The NAV module sets target elevation (Ht) equal to the
stored elevation. If the target elevation (Ht) is not stored, the NAV
module sets the target altitude equal to zero (sea level). The NAV module
then converts the retrieved latitude, longitude, and target elevation to a
geocentric position. The module determines HAT by subtracting target
elevation from system altitude (Hsys). The NAV designation uses this
HAT determination routine regardless of the sensor priority selected on
the A/G delivery display.

Once made, this designation is retained until undesignated or replaced by

another designation. Any of the other designation methods can be used
for a subsequent designation as they all overwrite a NAV designation.

D-27 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_34.jpeg:
With the target designated and coordinate transformations complete, the
CC commands the TGT IR to the A/G mode and wide field of view, and
directs the pod head to the target line of sight (laterally and vertically).
The cue point is saved (in that, if the target pod is slewed it can, via
HOTAS, be returned to the previously cued position) and the target
sequence point syntax is displayed at PB #17 of the TGT IR display in
preparation for a possible TGT IR redesignation.

Procedures

The bulk of this procedure, and certainly the most critical part, takes
place during mission planning.

Obtain Coordinates: Since the coordinates become the target, right or
wrong, use the most accurate source possible. Do not pick them off of a
JNC chart. In addition to the lat/long, it is very important to use the
correct target elevation.

If coordinates are obtained from a map, they can be no more accurate than
the basic accuracy of the map. If the target coordinates are chosen off a
1:250,000 JOG, the best expected accuracy is 500 feet horizontally and
100 feet vertically.

Assign / Enter Coordinates: Assign the data to a target syntax sequence
point (xx.) utilizing AFMSS/DTM or manual procedures.

Select Target: As the route is flown, either allow the system to
auto-sequence, or enter the target point directly into the UFC as the
current aircraft sequence point. The designation occurs when both the
target sequence point becomes the current point and A/G MM is selected.
(These two requirements can occur in either order.)

No Other Designation: The NAV module only makes the designation with
no current designation. This method cannot overwrite an existing
designation.

MN performance has a significant effect on the accuracy of this method. If
the MN present position is in error, the calculated relative position of the
target is also in error. This results in sensor pointing errors, attack
steering errors, and weapon(s) release errors.

AGD-4 D - 28


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_35.jpeg:
Although it is the MN which calculates the location of the target and
provides weapon(s) release steering, INS performance is important to
overall system accuracy. Its primary effect, as far as designation is
concerned, is on MN performance. It is important to MN accuracy because
the MN receives essential information from the INS.

HAT Update

The engineers who designed the designation methods realized that a HAT
measurement taken at a great distance/time from the target may not be
very accurate. Therefore, an automatic update to the HAT portion of the
designation triangle is attempted at 15 TREL. RALT and AGR are the
only choices for this update.

RALT

Although only SYS is used to establish the aircraft-to-target relationship
at the time of the NAV designation, RALT can be used to update the
aircraft-to-target relationship, but only after the aircraft has reached 15
seconds to weapon(s) release (15 TREL). RALT must be valid (aircraft
within radar altimeter pitch and bank limits). Additionally, the manual
hierarchy must be selected on the A/G DLVRY display and RALT must be
higher than SYS (and AGR) in the hierarchy. With all the above satisfied,
the aircrew may see the target designator (TD) diamond symbol on the
HUD shift in elevation as the system transitions from SYS to RALT. The
NAV data block on the HUD will also change from SYS to RALT as the
transition occurs. It is important to note that the position of the target
(coordinates/elevation) has not changed. Only the “aircraft CC
understanding” of the aircraft-to-target relationship has changed.

AGR

The CC automatically commands the radar to provide a slant range
measurement [aircraft to target designation (the TD diamond)] when the
CC determines a slant range measurement is required. For a NAV
designation the CC forces the radar to the AGR mode at 15 TREL (AUTO
delivery PACS mode), but only if the radar is not supporting an in-flight
MRM.

D - 29 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_36.jpeg:
Even after the CC has commanded AGR and AGR has been achieved,
AGR will not be used unless:

e The radar elevation angle (graze angle) is at least -1.25°.

e Kither the AUTO sensor hierarchy is selected on the A/G DLVRY
display or the MANUAL sensor hierarchy is selected with AGR above
SYS and RALT (assuming RALT is valid) in the hierarchy.

e The computed range from AGR must be within -10,000/+15,000 feet
of the existing designation (in this case, the original NAV
designation).

e The target designation is within the radar gimbal limits.

Once valid AGR is achieved, a range analog bar appears at the reticle
displaying slant range (pegged at 23,000 feet until slant range reaches
23,000 feet) and digital slant range appears above the sequence point line
in the HUD data block. “RNG” appears in the A/G radar display BIT
window and a digital range readout appears centered at the top of the A/G
radar display.

If AGR is being used by the system to compute HAT (it is the highest
usable member of the selected sensor hierarchy on the A/G DLVRY
display), then “AGR” appears in the bottom right of the HUD NAV data
block following the delivery mode (i.e., AUTO AGR) and AGR is boxed on
the A/G DLVRY display.

Once inside 15 seconds TREL, when the radar goes to AGR, neither crew
member can take command of the radar (A/A or A/G) until the target is
undesignated (more later on how to undesignate) or the designated target
location exceeds radar gimbal limits.

If the radar is supporting an in-flight MRM, another attempt to go to AGR
is made at 10 TREL. When MRM support is no longer required, the radar
will enter AGR if and when all the other prerequisites for AGR are valid.
If AGR becomes invalid, the CC will default to the next appropriate
member of the HAT sensor hierarchy as selected on the A/G DLVRY
display.

AGD-4 D - 30


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_37.jpeg:
Crew Errors

Choosing erroneous coordinates/elevation is the most basic crew error
concerning the NAV designation. Another basic crew error could involve
data entry. If the target data is entered incorrectly, an erroneous
designation occurs. The NAV module designates the stored
coordinates/elevation as the target, whatever those coordinates/
elevation are.

A not quite so obvious error is mismanagement of INS/MN updates. Make
sure the present position and velocities of the INS and MN are as accurate
as possible, and guard against putting an error into either system. Do not
update position unless the coordinates of the update point are certain and
more accurate than the existing error. You can feel confident about a
PVU of the MN, and should consider accomplishing one within five
minutes of bomb release, and before designations. Remember, for five
minutes following a MN PVU, the MN uses INS velocity corrected by the
error measured by the PVU. After this five minute period the corrections
are removed and potential velocity errors in the mission NAV can cause
bad bomb scores.

A/G Radar Designation

Description

When the crew member in command of the air-to-ground radar commands
target designation, the CC sends a mark command to the radar. The
radar marks the cursor position and returns a time tagged Rx and Ry to
the CC which identifies the target designation position relative to the
aircraft MN present position.

D-31 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_38.jpeg:
The next step is to determine the elevation of the marked target and
aircraft height above the target (HAT). If a sequence point is displayed at
the A/G radar (PB #17), the NAV module retrieves the sequence point
data and sets the ground point elevation equal to sequence point
elevation. If the sequence point displayed at PB #17 is a target offset
point, the NAV module retrieves the associated target point data and
computes target position by applying the target offset-to-target
relationship to the cursor position (and uses the target elevation, vice the
offset elevation). If the PB #17 sequence point’s elevation is unknown or if
“SP” is displayed at PB #17, the NAV module uses the current aircraft
sequence point stored elevation. If the current aircraft sequence point
elevation is unknown, ground point elevation is set equal to sea level.
This altitude determination routine is used regardless of the priority
sensor selected on the A/G delivery display.

With target relative position and target elevation now known, the NAV
module calculates earth coordinates and designates the target at lat/long
and Ht. This designation is retained until undesignated or replaced by
another designation. An A/G radar designation can be overwritten by any
subsequent type of designation except NAV, including another A/G radar
designation. Following the designation, the NAV module completes all of
the required coordinate transformations and sends them to the data base
for use by avionic systems as required.

With the target designated, the CC commands the TGT IR to the A/G
mode and wide field of view, and directs the target pod to the target line of
sight (azimuth and elevation). The cue point is saved (again, for a return
to cue, via HOTAS, if the target pod is slewed off the cued position).

When a target designation or cue occurs on the A/G radar format (TGT or
CUE cursor function selected) with a sequence point number adjacent to
PB #17, the sequence point number will also be displayed on the TGT IR
format adjacent to PB #17. When a target offset number is displayed
adjacent to PB #17 on the A/G radar (e.g., 3.01) and a target designation
occurs with the A/G radar (TGT cursor function), the TGT IR would be
cued to the target (versus the offset) and the target number (i.e., 3.) would
be displayed on the TGT IR format at PB #17. With CUE cursor function
the TGT IR will be cued to the target offset line of sight and TGT IR

PB #17 will reflect the offset syntax.

AGD-4 D - 32


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_39.jpeg:
If “SP” is displayed adjacent to PB #17 for A/G radar designation then
“SP” will be displayed at TGT IR (PB #17).

Procedures

A/G Radar: To employ this procedure, an A/G radar display must be on
one of the MPDs and you must be in command of the display
(Figure D-10).

SEQUENCE
RSO
FUNCTON POINT
STEERING
DESIGNATE

Seeee

Figure D - 10. Radar Designation.

AGD-04-

=
Oo

Radar Mode: Select the desired radar display mode. Target designations
can be accomplished in RBM, GMT, HRM (PPI or patch map), or BCN
modes. The display may be frozen or unfrozen; usually it is frozen.

Cursor Function: Select the TGT cursor function via PB #7 of the radar
display or by moving the castle switch aft on the RCP hand controller.

D - 33 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the operating characteristics of the following means of
designation: NAV, A/G radar, TGT IR, HUD (AUTO and CDIP
pipper), and zero point.

2. Identify the procedures to accomplish designation using each of the
following methods: NAV, A/G radar, TGT IR, HUD (AUTO and CDIP

pipper), and zero point.

3. Identify how to utilize the A/G delivery display and the A/G delivery
program display to:

a. Program and select height above target (HAT) source
hierarchies.

b. Program/select weapons delivery options including mils,
minimum recovery altitude (MRA), loft angles, along track/cross
track corrections, time to arm (TARM), desired ground range
(DGR), and manual/auto laser options (MLAS/ALAS).

4. Identify the procedures to undesignate a target.
REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I Air-to-Ground Delivery
Programming

AGD-4 B-1


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_40.jpeg:
Beware: The DESIGNATE message is overused in the current software.
If TGT is not displayed at PB #7 on the A/G radar display when
DESIGNATE appears, a target for weapon(s) release has not been
designated. CUE and MARK cursor function also provide the
DESIGNATE message.

Cursor Position: To designate the target of interest, put the cursor over
the target or one of its offsets. The fastest and most accurate way to do
this is to step the cursor via the FCP coolie switch or RCP castle switch
and refine with the TDC. Make it a practice to step the cursor to the
target (or offset) to prevent a cursor/PB #17 sequence point mismatch.
When designating, the altitude stored against the PB #17 sequence point
becomes the target elevation, even if the point is the wrong one.

TDC/Trigger: With the cursor over the desired geographic point video,
press the TDC in the FCP or squeeze the hand controller trigger to full
action in the RCP. DESIGNATE appears in the center of the radar screen
for five seconds, the solid or segmented triangle centers over the target or
offset, respectively, and a pattern steering line is initialized over the
target pointing directly away from the aircraft.

Pattern Steering Line (PSL): If designating through the A/G radar, it is
possible to activate the PSL and establish steering to a desired delivery
heading.

e Auto acq aft - moving the auto acq on the FCP stick grip or the RCP
hand controller aft enables the PSL for slewing.

e TDC - eccentric force on the TDC causes the PSL to rotate clockwise
or counterclockwise. The line itself rotates 360° but HUD PSL
steering will not be activated if it will result in a heading change of
more than 30° in either direction from the current line of sight to the
target. Inability to achieve PSL steering is not apparent on the
radar, but the HUD steering cue does not change from an azimuth
steering line to a bank steering bar.

e TDC/trigger - depressing the FCP TDC or the RCP hand controller

trigger to full action designates the PSL. As a result, DESIGNATE
appears on the display for five seconds.

AGD-4 D - 34


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_41.jpeg:
HAT Derivation

HAT derivation for A/G radar designation is almost exactly the same as it
is for a NAV designation. Only SYS is used until 15 TREL. Hsys - Hsp of
the A/G radar PB #17 displayed sequence point is used. If target offset
syntax is displayed at PB #17, the elevation stored against the associated
target is used. If there is no sequence point displayed at PB #17 (“SP” is
displayed), then the CC uses the current aircraft sequence point elevation
as the target elevation.

RALT or AGR may be utilized once the aircraft reaches 15 TREL, but only
if included in the selected hierarchy above SYS. RALT will never be used
if the AUTO hierarchy is selected. The CC’s logic for RALT and AGR is
exactly as previously discussed for a NAV designation.

Factors Affecting Accuracy

INS performance is important to system accuracy because it provides
information to the MN and is the source of stabilization for the radar.

INS/MN present position accuracy has a significant effect on the accuracy
of this method. The sequence point symbols are positioned as a function of
the selected PP keeping source. If the present position is incorrect, the
sequence point symbols will be mispositioned on the radar display making
it more difficult to identify the target or offset. The earth coordinates
generated for the designated target will be in error by the existing PP
error, but the aircraft’s relative position to the target should still be
correct and bombing accuracy is not seriously affected. If a MN velocity
error exists, steering and release errors result. Their magnitudes depend
on the elapsed time between map video construction and weapon(s)
release (drift).

All the standard errors that apply to radar interpretation apply to
designating targets. If the radar is not harmonized properly, component
errors result in an erroneous target relative position. Factors like target
definition and A/G radar video quality influence the ability to identify the
actual target video.

D-35 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_42.jpeg:
Crew Errors

Mismanagement of MN and INS updates is a source of crew error. Ensure
the navigation system is as accurate as possible and guard against
inducing errors by accomplishing bad updates. A PVU to the MN should
be accomplished just before attempting to designate the target (or before
constructing a patch map).

Radar interpretation errors are a factor; utilizing smaller size patch maps
helps quite a bit. Probably the greatest source of error in designating
from the radar lies in cursor placement techniques.

TGT IR

The TGT IR pod can be used to designate the target position relative to
the aircraft. Pod angles along with a range or altitude source are then
used to determine X, Y, Z, which the navigation module transforms into
latitude, longitude, and Ht.

Description

When the crew member in command of the TGT IR display performs a
TGT IR designation, the NAV module determines the target position
relative to the aircraft utilizing pod angles and either a slant range or an
aircraft altitude. The sensor hierarchy scheme used to determine the
designated location is:

e (LAS) - Gif it is the priority sensor and valid) laser range is combined
with pod head pointing angles to calculate the azimuth, range and Ht
(range and Ht from slant range and pod elevation angle).

e (AGR) - [if LAS is invalid, or AGR is the hierarchy sensor (and valid)],
is combined with TGT IR pointing angles to calculate target position
in the same manner as LAS.

e (RALT) - Gf neither laser nor AGR is valid, or RALT is the priority
sensor and valid) is used as height above the target is calculated as
HAT = RALT. Pod pointing angles are used to determine target
azimuth. Pod elevation angle and RALT are used to calculate target
range.

AGD-4 D - 36


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_43.jpeg:
e (SYS) - Gf a sequence point is displayed at PB #17 of the TGT IR
display and its elevation is known) is subtracted from aircraft system
altitude to calculate height (HAT = SYS - Hsp). Again, TGT IR pod
pointing angles are used to determine target azimuth. If the PB #17
elevation is unknown, or PB #17 is SP, current aircraft sequence
point elevation (Hsp) is used as Ht. Lastly, 0 (sea level) is used as
Ht.

e (HRM) - is only available for TGT IR designations. It requires that a
current radar designation (from a HRM patch map) be in effect at the
time of the TGT IR designation. It uses the ground range from the
radar designation, along with pod azimuth and elevation angles, to
determine the location of the TGT IR designation (X, Y, Z) and
subsequently HAT.

e (PASS) - is only available for TGT IR designations. In lieu of any
altitude or range information, it uses aircraft velocity with pod angles
and LOS (gimbal) rates to determine the TGT IR designation location
(X, Y, Z) and subsequently HAT. PASS requires that the designation
is accomplished with the TGT IR in a track mode and initially uses a
range or altitude source (from the target track). PASS accuracy for
HAT (for weapon(s) delivery) is highly dependent on high quality
track through weapons release. It is generally considered a less
desirable capability than those using actual ranging or altitude.

TGT IR/AGR

Prerequisite for using AGR with a TGT IR designation is AGR as the
priority sensor. Additionally, the crew member must initiate a second
take command of the TGT IR display while already in command. This
second take command puts the TGT IR in command of the radar, thus
providing AGR to the pod line of sight. AGR will not slave to the TGT IR
if the radar is tracking an air-to-air target or if the designated
air-to-ground target is outside the radar gimbal limits. In these instances,
“RDR IN USE” or “RDR GIMBAL” messages will be displayed in the
center of the TGT IR video.

Once the TGT IR has command of the radar (in AGR), it retains command
until either crew member takes command of an A/A or A/G radar display,
or the pilot takes command of the HUD or the TGT IR line of sight exceeds
radar gimbal limits.

D-37 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_44.jpeg:
With target relative position and elevation known, the NAV module
calculates the target earth coordinates and designates the target at
lat/long and Ht. This designation is retained until undesignated or
replaced by another designation.

CDES

The target pod can be used to provide a continuous designation of the
target if proper requirements are met. This is the only way to
automatically update the designation while proceeding to the target. All
other methods of designation are single shot designations which can be
updated manually, but in some cases (NAV and CDIP pipper), may not be
practical. Only the LAS, HRM, and PASS are available to calculate the
designation triangle for CDES. With CDES boxed at PB #1 on the target
pod, the designation is updated with new range and line of sight
information as long as that information is valid.

CDES is initiated with the normal one shot designation HOTAS and will
remain in that mode as long as the following conditions are satisfied.

e Point, area, or offset track commanded

e CDES boxed at PB #1

e Target designated via TGT IR display

e No TDC slewing of the target pod

e LAS, HRM, or PASS range selected and valid

If continuous designation is interrupted, the designation remains on the
last valid designation update until the aircrew redesignates, or if the slew

was initiated in cursor function TGT, when TDC slewing stops and range
source is still valid.

AGD-4 D - 38


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_45.jpeg:
Factors Affecting Accuracy

Meteorological conditions have a pronounced effect on this mode of
designation. The IR signature of the target must be good enough to
clearly identify the target.

INS and MN performance play essentially the same role in a TGT IR
designation as in an A/G radar designation. Since the designation is an
aircraft-to-target relative position perspective, PP error will not affect the
designation, assuming the target can be found with the TGT IR.

If the pod is not properly aligned, it may be difficult to find the target, and
the target relative position will be incorrectly computed when designating.
Video quality on the MPD will affect the ability to recognize the target.

When the target pod is cued (TSD, A/G RDR, NAV or a HUD designation,
quick stepping the pod), PB #17 on the TGT IR pod will show the target
number or SP and how the pod was cued.

Crew Errors

Mismanagement of MN and INS updates is a source of crew error.

Present position is particularly important if the TGT IR pod is cued from a
NAV designation. Best available velocities are important to minimize
system drift from the time of designation to the time of weapon(s) release,
although the time interval between TGT IR designation and weapon(s)
release is generally short (less than two minutes). Consider a PVU of the
MN within five minutes of weapon(s) release and before designation.

D - 39 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_46.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Which target designation method requires no data outside the CC (no
sensor input)?

2. Once a NAV target designation is accomplished, aircraft steering is to
the

a. sequence point.
designated target.

c. weapon(s) release point for a computed weapon(s) release
(nonguided munitions).

d. IP, then to a weapon(s) release point for computed weapon(s)
release (nonguided munitions).

3. A NAV designation will override which of the following?

A/G radar designations only

TGT IR designations only

Visual (HUD) designations only

NAV designations will not override any other type of designation

Re op

4. A NAV designation can be accomplished

only to steer points.

to steer points, target offsets or targets.
only to target offsets and targets.

only to targets.

Re op

5. Accomplishing a NAV designation requires that the aircrew

a. first select A/G master mode, then enter a target as the current
aircraft sequence point.

b. first enter a target as the current aircraft sequence point then
select the A/G master mode.

c. select aircraft steering to a target and select the A/G master
mode. These actions can be accomplished in either order.

d. select aircraft steering to the IP while in the A/G master mode.

AGD-4 D - 40


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_47.jpeg:
During an A/G radar target designation the target elevation is the

a. stored elevation of the A/G radar SP at PB #17.

b. stored elevation of the A/G radar SP at PB #17, unless the SP is
a target offset; then the target elevation is used.

c. current aircraft sequence point, regardless of the A/G radar PB
#17 sequence point.

d. elevation derived from laser ranging.

An A/G radar target designation can be accomplished from

a. aRBM display.

b. aHRM PPI display.

c. aHRM patch map display.
d. any of the above.

An IR target pod designation can only be accomplished if the LASER
is armed and lasing.

a. True
b. False

What are the requirements for TGT IR continuous designation?

NAV designation

Point, area, or offset track commanded
Laser fired and valid

All of the above

Boop

D-41 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_48.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. NAV designation

2. ¢
3. d
4. d
5. Cc
6. b
7. d
8. b
9. b

AGD-4 D - 42


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_49.jpeg:
HUD DESIGNATIONS

There are two ways to designate a target and one way to redesignate a
target using the symbology presented in the HUD with the A/G master
mode selected. The available methods depend on which weapons delivery
mode is selected. First is with the AUTO pipper and no previous
designation. Second is with the CDIP pipper with or without a previous
designation. The final method is actually changing a previous designation
by moving the target designator (TD) diamond in the HUD.

HUD Pipper

This method uses the location (az/el) of the AUTO or CDIP pipper and
LAS/AGR ranging, RALT or SYS to determine the target position relative
to the aircraft. This is referenced to MN present position to calculate
target earth coordinates. The 1 mil or 2 mil pipper (as selected on the
HUD repeater display) can be used.

Description

The pipper method requires visual conditions in the target area; it can be
used in conjunction with a diving AUTO delivery profile which is similar
to dive toss in other aircraft. In the computed deliveries lesson, this is
referred to as “undesignated AUTO.” It is always used when weapon(s)
release is generated in CDIP delivery mode.

In undesignated AUTO or any CDIP (designated or undesignated
delivery), when either crew member presses the pickle button or the pilot
depresses the TDC while in command of the HUD, the ground location
overlaid by the pipper becomes the designated target. The hierarchy of
laser range, radar range, or system altitude minus sequence point
elevation is used if the auto sensor priority is selected. If the manual
sensor hierarchy is utilized the aircrew can add RALT and adjust the
hierarchy order.

Once the target’s relative position and elevation are known, the NAV
module calculates the target earth coordinates and designates the target
at lat/long and Ht. This designation is retained until undesignated or
replaced by another designation. Following the designation, the NAV
module completes all of the required coordinate transformations and
sends them to the data base for use by avionic systems as required.

D - 43 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End Of Text Quiz.

2. Read the references in TO 1F-15E-34-1-1, Section I, Air-to-Ground
Delivery Programming.

C-1 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_50.jpeg:
Procedures
Refer to Figures D-11 and D-12 in reading these procedures.

A/G Master Mode: The AUTO or CDIP pipper is displayed only in A/G
master mode. You must be in the A/G master mode to designate a target
with the pipper.

Master Arm: This switch must be in ARM to utilize the pickle button.
(The TDC can be used with the master arm in either SAFE or ARM).

PACS Program: Pipper designation functions in both AUTO and CDIP;
therefore, select either one. (Expanded CDIP procedures are addressed in
a later lesson.)

e AUTO (Figure D-12) - There must be no other prior designation at
pickle in this mode (undesignated AUTO). In designated AUTO the
pickle button serves only as a consent to release; it does not affect the
current designation.

e CDIP (Figure D-11) - Designation/redesignation occurs at pickle.
Therefore, this method can be used in either designated or
undesignated CDIP.

Take Command of HUD: To have radar/laser ranging available, the pilot
must ensure the radar (AGR) and/or TGT IR pod are slaved to the HUD.
HUD command is not required for a pipper designation with the pickle
button, however it is required for a pipper designation with the TDC.

Pipper on Target: Fly to place the pipper on the target. In the case of an
AUTO delivery, the pipper is coincident with the velocity vector.
Alternately, the pilot can slew the AUTO reticle within the HUD FOV
under the following conditions.

e A/Gmaster mode selected.

e HUD command.

AGD-4 D - 44


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_51.jpeg:
e Undesignated AUTO without depressing the TDC, the pilot slews the
HUD reticle. When the TDC is released, the reticle is HUD stabilized
at its current position. When the pickle button (or TDC) is pressed, a
target is designated at the reticle position and the reticle returns to
the velocity vector. The TD diamond appears at the designated
location. If the pilot slews the reticle and then desires to return it to
the velocity vector (without designating a target) he can do so by
pressing and releasing the nose gear steering button.

13. 14 15
ny on
101-249
REFERENCE

Los

20 +4120
OR LAS

SYS
25 ——125 CDIP AGR RALT

© NORM ne DAY Z
REJ1 @: CF auto |@) | A
MASTER REJ2 8 © MIN
MODE

AGD-04-11

Figure D - 11. Pipper Designation (Undesignated CDIP).

D - 45 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_52.jpeg:
REFERENCE
LOS

NOT TGT
20 --- --420
AUTO AGR OR LAS
SYS
25L—- -~125 RALT

HUD
NORM DAY
REJ1 AUTO R A ) 6
© REJ2 NIGHT

AGD-04-12

Figure D - 12. Pipper Designation (Undesignated AUTO).

Once a designation is created (by any of the designation methods) with
HUD command and using the TDC (depressing, then slewing), the pilot
can reposition the designation. Remember, slewing without depressing
the TDC slews the undesignated AUTO pipper. The new designation
occurs when the TDC is released. LAS, AGR, SYS, or RALT can be used
to determine the position of the new target.

HUD Redesignation

The TD method can also be used to change the location of an existing
designation. This method is not normally used if you are attempting to
drop on the target on the same pass as you intend to redesignate. As with
the two previous pipper designation methods, you must first find the
target visually before making a successful redesignation.

AGD-4 D - 46


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_53.jpeg:
Once the redesignation occurs, the designation triangle is recomputed
with the appropriate changes in the steering to the weapons release point.

With A/G master mode and an existing designation that is within the
HUD FOV, a TD diamond is displayed on the HUD. If the pilot has
command of the HUD, depressing and holding the TDC allows
repositioning the diamond by slewing the TDC. Once the TDC is released,
the new location is designated. The target pod should remain cued to the
TD as it moves to the new location, and the steering will change when the
pilot releases the TDC. (Redesignation computations are not performed
until the TDC is released.)

HUD Designations and AGR

When the pilot takes command of the HUD, the radar enters AGR at the
undesignated AUTO or the CDIP pipper. In designated AUTO, AGR is to
the target diamond line of sight. The radar must not be supporting an
in-flight MRM. Normal AGR validity checks apply for the AGR to be used
in HAT computations (greater than 1.25° graze angle; + 15,000 feet, -
10,000 feet from existing designation and target designation within radar
gimbal limits). A double request will allow a crew member to take
command of the A/A or A/G radar or to take command of the AGR with the
TGT IR pod. If AGR is achieved, slant range (digital and analog bar) is
displayed on the HUD. AGR will not be used for Ht/HAT calculations
unless it is the priority sensor.

HUD Designations and LAS

A double take command of the HUD in A/G master mode will slave the
TGT IR to the HUD if LAS is included in the current HAT hierarchy and
the TGT IR is in the A/G mode and not in a track mode. The TGT IR will
be slaved to the undesignated AUTO or CDIP pipper or to the designated
AUTO target diamond. LAS will only be used if the pod is slaved to a
HUD reference with LAS ranging digital/analog range available on the
HUD (i.e., valid ranging).

For LAS to be used, the TGT IR pod must be slaved to the TD diamond
(designated AUTO, second take command of the HUD).

D - 47 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_54.jpeg:
Factors Affecting Accuracy

For all the HUD designation methods, the target must be visible.
Anything which hampers sighting the target (darkness, clouds, terrain,
etc.) hampers use of this mode. Range and altitude source are quite
significant. The aircrew should select the most appropriate hierarchy on
the A/G delivery display. Again, LAS, AGR, RALT, or SYS can be used.

System harmonization may be a problem since the pilot is virtually
always sighting via one system and measuring via another.

Large MN position errors may preclude steering that is accurate enough
to visually acquire the target.

Small INS/MN velocity errors have little effect [from designation to
weapon(s) release] due to the short ranges involved. Present position
errors result in an error in computing the target lat/long, but this should
not seriously affect the accuracy of the bombing system, if aircraft to
target relative position is accurate.

Crew Errors

Mismanagement of MN and INS updates is a source of crew error. Make
sure the navigation system is as accurate as possible. A bad update
produces an inaccurate navigation system which could result in inability
to visually acquire the target.

Failing to take command of the HUD prevents using the TDC (to slew the
reticle, designate the reticle, or slew the TD diamond). Command of the
radar and TGT IR pod through the HUD also requires HUD command.

The slew rate of the TD diamond is quite high, and it is very easy to slew
the diamond off the target as the TDC is released, particularly when close
to the target. The same is true when slewing the AUTO reticle. The crew
workload must also be considered before attempting to use the HUD
methods of designating and redesignating. In most situations a good plan
will allow the WSO to find the target in the TGT IR and designate using
the 16 power magnification capability of the target pod. In this case, it is
likely the option of changing the designation with the HUD is liable to
induce positioning errors.

AGD-4 D - 48


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_55.jpeg:
Zero Point

This is a form of NAV designation, in that the computations are sourced
entirely within the NAV module, like the NAV designation. Outside
sensor information is not required.

Description

A zero point designation is essentially the reverse of the NAV designation
method. Rather than starting with stored target earth coordinates and
finding target relative position, the NAV module starts with a stored
relative position, and generates earth coordinates. The crew enters the
target’s relative position from a known visual point via the UFC against a
unique sequence point (0.) syntax.

When over the visual IP, the crew enters 0. as the aircraft current
sequence point. At the 0. entry, the MN adds the stored target relative
position (from the visual point) to the visual position and designates the
target at lat/long and Ht. This designation is retained until undesignated
or replaced by a new designation. At this time, the NAV module
completes all of the required coordinate transformations and sends them
to the data base for use by avionic systems as required. Altitude sourcing
is determined using the same priority as is used for the radar and NAV
designation options (e.g., SYS), with the capability to use AGR or RALT
inside 15 seconds TREL (if selected and valid).

D - 49 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_56.jpeg:
Procedures

Point Data Submenu: Select the point data submenu on the UFC
(Figure D-18).

LOCATION OF 0.
FROM OVERFLY
Pe MISUAL

ELV 465°

TARGET
ELEVATION

Uces.18eb x

125

_|(Uee6.

Ce
eaee

ao
leia/ae

AGD-04-13

VOL
R1e@OR3

cio

Figure D - 13. Point Data DIR/RNG Submenu.

AGD-4 D - 50


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_57.jpeg:
Select 0.: This is the only possible sequence point for this method.
Selecting 0. forces the UFC to RNG/BRG submenu with all of the data
windows zeroed out (000 nm, 000°, ELV 000). The DIR/RNG submenu
(Figure D-13) is available and should be used, as it allows entry to one foot
accuracy (versus one-tenth of a nm accuracy from the RNG/BRG format).

0. Data: Insert target relative position and elevation data. You may enter
zero for the offsets (direction and range), but you then have to fly over the
target for the designation procedure and reattack.

Data 1/Menu 1: Select a UFC format page from which you can enter a
destination (Data 1 or Menu 1) (Figure D-14).

A/G Master Mode: You must be in the A/G master mode to use this
method.

ENTER ZERO
POINT
WIND |

125 Uees. 1886

AGD-04-14

Figure D - 14. Data 1 Display.

D-51 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_58.jpeg:
Overfly: Fly to the known geographic point corresponding to the visual IP.
Use the best available means of navigation.

Enter 0.: When over the visual IP with 0. waiting in the scratchpad, press
PB #10 on the UFC. This should immediately give you steering to the
wind-corrected weapon(s) release point. The HUD symbology will change
from NAV information to a designated AUTO or CDIP presentation.

Next Steer Point: Though not required to designate, this step is mentioned
because the system will not auto-sequence and you must enter the next
point including the route identifier (e.g., 17A) when steering to the target
is no longer desired.

Factors Affecting Accuracy

Like the other visual methods, anything that hampers sighting the visual
point limits the method.

If the RNG/BRG is entered, it is only possible to enter offsets to the
nearest degree and one-tenth of a nautical mile. This may be a bit coarse
for targeting purposes. If possible, use direction and range offsets. This is
viable if planning a 0. backup to use in the event of a navigation system
gross error.

Even though MN present position is used to determine the target’s earth
coordinates, it is not terribly important to bombing accuracy. The
accuracy of the designation for bombing purposes is driven by the
accuracy of the relative position of the target at 0. entry. MN velocity
errors may be a problem if the solution time (IP to target) is long.

Crew Errors

The principal sources of crew error with this method occur in data
measurements entry and precision of designating over the visual point.

AGD-4 D - 52


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_59.jpeg:
UNDESIGNATION
Purpose

There are several valid reasons for undesignating targets. Remember,
there is room in memory for only one designation. So, to hit a new target,
or just refine the current designation, it is necessary to have some way of
eliminating the old target. In some cases, this is done by overwriting the
existing designation. For some designation methods, however, the
designation must be blank; these methods do not overwrite. NAV
designation and AUTO pipper designation do not overwrite existing
designations; they are only possible from an undesignated condition.

Use caution in blindly undesignating, since undesignating does not return
to the previous designation. It erases the designation, leaving only NAV
steering (or no steering if an unprogrammed target of opportunity was
designated). In the case of zero point, the system does not step to the next
point. The next point must be entered, which erases the designation
register.

Procedures

There are essentially three ways to undesignate A/G targets: the boat
switch in the FCP, the hand controller auto acq in the RCP, or the UFC in
either cockpit.

Boat Switch

A/G Master Mode: Using the boat switch on the FCP throttle to
undesignate A/G targets requires A/G master mode. Additionally, the
pilot must not be in command of the A/A radar.

Boat Switch Aft: Moving the boat switch aft undesignates the A/G target
regardless of the method of designation. If the PSL had been activated
and designated, the first aft movement of the boat switch undesignates
the PSL and a second aft movement of the boat switch undesignates the
target.

D-53 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-4 C-2


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_60.jpeg:
Hand Controller Auto Acq

Sensor Command: To use the RCP hand controller to undesignate a
target, that hand controller must be assigned command of the A/G radar
or TGT IR and the target cursor function must be selected.

Auto Acq: Pressing down on the hand controller auto acq undesignates
the target. If the PSL had been activated and designated, the first
depression of the auto acq switch undesignates the PSL and a second
downward movement of the auto acq switch undesignates the target. The
A/G radar and TGT IR can be used to undesignate any target, regardless
of the method used to designate the target.

UFC

A/G Master Mode: Using the UFC method to undesignate a target
requires A/G master mode.

Steer Point Entry: Entry of a new current aircraft sequence point into the
UFC Data 1 or Menu 1 undesignates the target. If the NAV master mode
is selected and a new current aircraft sequence point is entered (either
manually or via auto-sequencing), the system provides steering to the next
point, but the target does not undesignate. Reentry into the A/G master
mode will again provide steering to the previously designated target.

AGD-4 D- 54


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_61.jpeg:
EMPLOYMENT

There are several ways to designate a target. See designate/
redesignate and IP-to-target run examples on the following pages.

The Scenario

For purposes of discussion, let us suppose you have planned to make a low
level ingress to a level attack in marginal weather (Figure D-15). You
have planned the route and have loaded all the pertinent route data into
the CC. You are flying the route and all is going well. As you get within
40 nm of the target, you consider a designation. You have checked the
MN and it is performing well. Before each designation, perform a MN
PVU (or use the IPVU option). A system altitude update may be desired.
If so, it should be performed at release TAS and MSL altitude if able.

5 SEC
RADAR MAP FOR UPDATE INS / MN
BSE SS SEARCH
Res —S>
40 NM; 5 MI
SF NY TO RELEASE
‘. =} Ons ON
~~ SS 5 SEC — Z :
=. RADAR XS fr

ES PVU =— 30 NM; 3:30 TO RELEASE
mt BS —
Wy aa A >
en 20 SEC SEARCH SK
ES rae
Ye SSN OF es SE
> SAY re » 2 NM; 11 SEC
n \ 2 2s VISUAL
Q ie NM i
1 1:45 TO RELEASE ;
Le 4. NM; 25 SEC
Xd) RADAR MAP e TO RELEASE
J) DESIGNATION 10NM TGTIR
(ps 1:00 TO RELEASE ACQUISITION
NAV DESIGNATION CUED EY RADA)
(IF RDR
NSUCCESSFUL)
g}

&

AGD-04-15

Figure D - 15. Employment.

D-55 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_62.jpeg:
Radar Designation

The only sensor you have that can possibly detect the target from long
range is the radar. At that, you have to climb to at least 1500 feet to
achieve LOS to the target. You may choose to climb briefly to make a
patch map of the target area. An A/G radar designation of the target
(versus an offset) from a .67 patch map (must be less than 40 nm from the
target) will produce the best accuracy. Consider using an expanded patch
map.

Satisfied you have a good map, freeze it and identify the target or offset.
Confirm PB #17 is correct and update/designate the target or offset. With
an update, you know your MN is accurate which means an accurate NAV
designation if you need it. If the target is on the radar display, you know
you have designated when the PSL appears over the target triangle.

NAV Designation

If your A/G radar designation was unsuccessful or not practical, a NAV
designation entering the target area is a likely option. As previously
covered, the method only works if no other designation exists. It does not
overwrite an existing designation. Select the A/G master mode; if no other
designation exists (no old one left over from a previous attack), when the
target point sequences, it is designated. The target is designated if the
destination line of the HUD data block reads “TGT” and the distance to
the target is preceded by a G versus an N. If you were successful in
getting the radar designation before selecting A/G master mode, this NAV
designation does not occur.

AGD-4 D - 56


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_63.jpeg:
TGT IR Designation

About a minute out from the target, start getting ready for the TGT IR
designation. It provides a more accurate designation, can provide
continuous designation, and provides laser energy on the target for
ranging and weapon guidance purposes. When designating with the TGT
IR, if a previous designation existed, there is no good indication the
designation has occurred if steering does not change.

Backups

You will use the above progression most of the time, but there are
alternatives. If you happen to visually acquire the target and note the
diamond is not over it, slew the diamond in a TD redesignation.
Alternately with target visual acquisition, AUTO or CDIP pipper
designations are available. The zero point method is available as a last
ditch, provided you have planned and entered the required offset data.

D-57 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_64.jpeg:
AUTONOMOUS LANDING GUIDANCE (ALG)

In addition to attacking surface targets, designations may also be used to
establish a touchdown point for use in the ALG mode. The ALG mode
provides “ILS-like” steering to any designated point on the ground.

To employ the ALG mode, the crew must be in the NAV or INST master
mode with a designation (NAV, A/G radar, TGT IR, HUD) and select ALG
at PB #5 of the HSI (Figure D-16). Once the touchdown point is
designated, the crew selects the final approach course using PBs #14 and
#15 on the HSI or by aligning the PSL on a radar designation with the
desired course. The CC plots a final approach fix (FAF) 10 nm from the
touchdown point. Steering to the touchdown point is via the selected
course. The PLAN view on the HSI is utilized to navigate to the ALG
FAF.

INBOUND
COURSE
SELECTION

RUNWAY
SYMBOL

DUCT GT

MLE T Ia

QoL
|

TOUCHDOWN
POINT

7
“45 Nd

Ud
n
oe
, Ase
HON

7 ¢y/ \

ALG MODE L aS}
SELECT TON 112x ALG 5B FAF (10 NM)
SWITCH 00:01:30 00:01:47 E —

TCN ILST GT ILSN NAV

AGD-04-16

Figure D - 16. HSI, ALG Display.

AGD-4 D -58


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_65.jpeg:
In the PLAN mode, the HSI displays a runway symbol, final approach
course and the FAF. In the CDI mode, the HSI displays a CDI just as it
does in the ILS steer mode. The runway and FAF symbols are not present
in the CDI mode. The CDI shows the relative displacement from the
selected course.

In the ALG mode, the HUD (Figure D-17) displays a CDI to indicate
relative course position, a bank steering bar to provide steering to the
selected course, and a glide slope indicator (scale and caret) to show
deviation from a 3° glide slope to the designated touchdown point. There
is no pitch steering bar displayed in ALG.

10'— —10
35 36 =O HEIGHT
ry a ABOVE
5 5 TARGET
253 \e we ° 3300
o125| ° R 2000
H 2100
|< _ FAF RWY
ais SENSOR
SELECTED

AGD-04-17

Figure D - 17. HUD, ALG Display.

There is no current operational guidance on how ALG may be used, but it
is not certified/approved for use in IMC. The aircrew is responsible for
terrain clearance. By arriving at the ALG FAF at 3000 feet AGL above
the designated touchdown point elevation, the aircrew can fly a 8° glide
slope from the FAF. The touchdown point elevation is determined by the
same methods used to determine target elevation during target
designation (designation method and HAT hierarchy).

D -59 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_66.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
1. When slewing the HUD TD diamond, the redesignation occurs when

a. the TDC is released after slewing the TD diamond.

b. the TDC is depressed/released while not in command of the
HUD.

the pickle button is released.

d. the castle switch is moved toward the HUD.

°

2. The pipper method of designation requires command of the HUD
when accomplished with

the pickle button, but not the TDC.
either the pickle button or the TDC.
the nose gear steering button.

the TDC, but not the pickle button.

pe op

3. Using the zero point designation method to designate, the aircrew

must enter 0. over the target.

must enter 0. over a visual offset point (IP).
may enter 0. over the target or an offset point.
may enter 0. at any time.

pe op

4. The FCP boat switch may be used to undesignate air-to-ground
targets in any master mode except A/A.

a. True
b. False

AGD-4 D - 60


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_67.jpeg:
In the NAV master mode, when the NAV system auto-sequences from
the target to the next steer point

steering is to the next point and the target is undesignated.
steering is to the next point but the target remains designated.
steering is to the target until it is undesignated.

steering reverts to ground track until the target is undesignated.

Boop

D-61 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_68.jpeg:
ANSWERS

l. a
2. d
3. Cc
4. b
5. b

AGD-4 D - 62


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_69.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

Computation of sensor pointing data is a function of the

po op

INS.
NAV module (MN).
individual sensor.

A/G module.

You selected A/G master mode and AUTO delivery mode on the
PACS and designated a target. When you pickle,

a.
b.

a

the point overlaid by the pipper is redesignated as the target.
the point overlaid by the TD diamond remains the target and is
not affected by pickling.

the pipper shifts to the TD diamond.

the diamond jumps up to the velocity vector.

If CDIP is the PACS programmed delivery mode, the ASL is

eS op

only displayed on the HUD while the pickle button is held down.
deleted as part of the post designation display.

appears when the pickle button is pressed and remains
displayed until the target is undesignated.

displayed as soon as the target is designated.

The NAV designation computes the target relative position using

ao

INS present position and crew entered target coordinates/
elevation.

crew entered target coordinates alone.

MN present position and crew entered target coordinates/
elevation.

MN present position and radar altimeter.

E-1 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
ROLE OF THE NAVIGATION (NAV) MODULE

The navigation module is the CC program element (a set of computer
algorithms) which provides the F-15E with the capability to accomplish
attitude reference and present position keeping, target designation/
undesignation, navigation steering and symbol placement, reference
system coordinate transformations, and sensor pointing. The NAV
module has other functions not germane to this discussion. Figure D-1
shows the relationship of the navigation module with other avionics in the
aircraft. This diagram has both before and after the installation of the
embedded global positioning system/inertial navigation system (EGI).

The central computer takes inputs from various sensors an positions
others in the process of designating a target. This mission navigator (MN)
is a computer subroutine within the NAV module which handles the bulk
of these functions.

LEGEND
[._] cc MEMORY T

[___] AVIONICS SYSTEMS Tape 1 |
ADC 1

[55] SOFTWARE MODULES ADP 2

ZZ SENSORS RADAR

1. (86-0183 THRU 92-0366 FNU INS

BEFORE TCTO 1F-15E-737)

[a]
2. (96-0200 AND UP AFTER PACS | FD Jee BASE <> AIG
TCTO 1F-15E-737)
TGT POD
COCKPIT CONTROLS |—+>| AIU_ | C&D |<«>
DISPLAYS ]<—»[_MPDP_ |

AGD-04-01

Figure D- 1. Navigation Module.

D-1 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_70.jpeg:
5. Using the A/G radar, you can designate

a. only preplanned targets.

b. only targets of opportunity.

c. preplanned targets or targets of opportunity.

d. targets of opportunity only if you enter the target altitude in the
UFC.

6. Command of the HUD is required for a HUD designation using the
a. TDC or pickle button.

b. pickle button but not the TDC.
c. TDC but not the pickle button (unless slewing pipper).

7. You do not need to be in the A/G master mode to undesignate when

using

a. the FCP boat switch.

b. the hand controller mode reject (RCP) (A/G RDR or TGT IR).
c. the UFC.

d. any method of undesignation.

AGD-4 E-2


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_71.jpeg:
A/A
A/G
ADC
ADI
AFMSS
AGR
AHRS
ALAS
ALG
ARMT
ASL
AT
AUTO
az
BCN
BRG

CBT

CC
CDI

CDIP

GLOSSARY
Air-to-air
Air-to-ground
Air data computer
Attitude director indicator
Air Force Mission Support System
Air-to-ground ranging
Attitude heading reference system
Automatic lasing
Automatic level/gain; autonomous landing guidance
Armament
Azimuth steering line
Along track
Automatic
Azimuth
Beacon
Bearing
Combat
Continuous
Central computer
Course deviation indicator

Continuously displayed impact point

F-1 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_72.jpeg:
CLR Clear

CONT Continuous

CT Cross track

DGR Desired ground range
DIL Displayed impact line
DIR Direct

DLVRY Delivery

DTM Data transfer module
EADI Electronic attitude director indicator
EGI Embedded GPS/INS
EHSI Electronic horizontal situation indicator
el Elevation

elev Elevation

ETA Estimated time of arrival
ETE Estimated time en route
FAF Final approach fix

FCP Front cockpit

FNU Fighter navigation unit
FOV Field of view

GBU Guided bomb unit

GMT Ground moving target
GPS Global positioning system

AGD-4 F-2


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_73.jpeg:
HOTAS
HRM
HSI
Hsp
Hsys
Ht
HUD
IMC
INS
INST
IP
IPVU
IR
JINC
JOG

JTIDS

lat
long

LOS

Height above ground

Height above target

Hands on throttle and stick

High resolution map

Horizontal situation indicator

Steer point elevation

System altitude

Target elevation

Head-up display

Instrument meteorological conditions
Inertial navigation system
Instrument

Identification point

Interleaved precision velocity update
Infrared

Jet navigation chart

Joint operations graphic

Joint tactical information distribution system
Laser

Latitude

Longitude

Line of sight

F-3 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_74.jpeg:
MAN

mils

MLAS

MM

MN

MPCD

MPD

MRA

MRM

MSL

NAV

hm

PACS

PASS

PB

PP

PPI

PPKS

PROG

PSL

PVC

AGD-4

Manual

Maximum

Milliradians

Manual lasing

Master mode

Mission navigator
Multipurpose color display
Multipurpose display
Minimum recovery altitude
Medium range missile

Mean sea level

Navigation

Nautical mile(s)

Programmable armament control set
Passive ranging from TGT IR pod pointing angles
Push button

Present position

Plan position indicator

Present position keeping source
Program

Pattern steering line

Precision/velocity consistency (filter)


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_75.jpeg:
PVU

RALT

RCP

RBM

RDY

RET

RNG

SAN

SLR

SP

SUU

SYS

SYSB

SYSG

TACAN

TARM

TAS

TD

TDC

TEWS

TGT

TNG

Precision velocity update

Radar altitude

Rear cockpit

Real beam map

Ready

Reticle; retard

Range

Valid but not passing sanity checks
Slant range

Sequence point

Stores suspension and release unit
Aircraft system altitude
Barometric system altitude

EGI system altitude

Tactical air navigation

Time to arm

True airspeed

Target designator

Target designator control

Tactical electronic warfare system
Target

Training

F-5 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_76.jpeg:
TPULL

TREL

TSD

UFC

UPDT

VAL

AGD-4

Time to pull

Time to release

Tactical situation display
Upfront control

Update

Valid


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_77.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

F-7 AGD-4


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_78.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_8.jpeg:
The MN calculates aircraft position independently from the FNU INS or
EGI. To do this, it must be supplied with its starting position and
continuous velocity (direction and magnitude) information.

Before EGI (86-0183 Through 92-0366 Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Position Keeping (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Starting Position: There are two sources of MN starting position: INS or
TACAN. This starting position is used only to initiate the MN and, during
a reset operation, to reinitiate the MN at the INS (or TACAN, if TACAN is
selected as the PP keeping source) present position (PP).

Velocities: Velocities are supplied by the INS (or the air data computer/
AHRS). The aircrew can modify the velocity used by the MN by
accomplishing a precision velocity update (PVU). Ina PVU, the
radar-measured velocities are compared to the INS-measured velocities
and delta velocities calculated. If the crew accepts the PVU, these delta
velocities are added to the INS reported velocities before they enter the
MN. After five minutes (or immediately after an INS PVU or following a
PVU CLR), the deltas are no longer applied and the MN once again uses
the velocities as reported by the INS. In the case of an interleaved
precision velocity update (IPVU), the delta velocities are computed once
every minute, the process is continuous, and the deltas are automatically
accepted with no aircrew action required (if the radar is functioning in a
PPI mode).

Present Position: The MN integrates velocities over time to determine
position changes which are then added to starting position to calculate
present position. Since the integration process is slower and has less
internal accuracy than the one used by the INS, after a time the MN and
INS positions disagree. If the MN present position is updated, the
calculated delta PP is added to the MN present position existing at the
moment of update. This essentially creates a new starting position from
which to calculate PP. A position update of the MN does not affect MN
velocities. If you update the INS position, the MN PP is reset to the INS.
The MN present position is sent to the CC data base for use as required
for pointing sensors, designating targets, placing navigation symbology,
and determining steering.

AGD-4 D-2


Text from AGD-4_Designations_page_9.jpeg:
After EGI (96-0200 and up or After TCTO 1F-15E-737)

When the aircraft is modified with the embedded GPS/INS (EGI) the role
of the mission navigator will be changed significantly. The data which is
used for navigation, steering, and weapon delivery computations is
provided by different sources, dependent on the present position keeping
source (PPKS). Because of the improved accuracy of the GPS position and
velocity measurements, the mission navigator will normally be relegated
to the backup mode in positioning for weapons deliveries.

Position Keeping (After TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Starting Position: The TACAN starting position for the mission navigator
will be replaced by the EGI. This gives two sources of MN starting
position: the EGI and the current INS (fighter navigation unit [FNU]
INS). Either can be selected to update the position of the MN. However,
for a MN reset, only the FNU INS position will be used to reset the MN
position. If the FNU INS position is invalid, the MN reset cannot be done.

Velocities: The velocities used by the MN to keep track of its position
continue to come from the FNU INS. The requirement for MN PVUs and
FNU INS PVUs remains, if the EGI is not the PPKS.

Present Position: The options for present position keeping will be the EGI,
MN, and FNU INS. The INS/GPS and TACAN (TCN) options have been
deleted. The air data computer (ADC) source is retained as a default
PPKS, but is no longer aircrew selectable. The PPKS defaults to FNU
INS upon startup, and must be changed by the aircrew if something other
than FNU INS is desired. If the selected PPKS is not available, then the
PPKS will default as shown in Table D-1.

Current PPKS | Default PPKS Best Available Altitude Source
Velocity

ser [ww [ect Bcrsysey

a
uns jane [ns | Pressure (SYS)

Table D - 1.

D-3 AGD-4


