Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY
AGD-5
COMPUTED BOMBING MODES

JULY 1998

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_10.jpeg:
Air Data Computer (ADC)

The ADC provides true airspeed, air density, and angle of attack to the CC
for use by the A/G module. The temperature corrected ADC pressure
altitude, aided by inertial velocities, is system altitude (SYSB), and is used
for height above target computations. Some of the information (airspeed
and Mach) is needed for the ballistics computations. Other information
(altitude) is used if the mission NAV determines that particular
information is the best available.

Reference System

The INS and AHRS deposit pitch, roll, heading, and inertial velocities
data into the CC data base to be used as required by the mission NAV and
the A/G module.

Equipment (96-0200 and up or after TCTO 1F-15E-737, Embedded
GPS/INS)

The central computer, multipurpose display processor, head-up display,
multipurpose display/color display and programmable armament control
set remain essentially the same. However, the air data computer and
reference system have changed.

Air Data Processor (ADP)

The air data computer has been replaced by the ADP. This change is
transparent to the operator. The system altitude is present position
keeping source (PPKS) selection dependent. With the EGI as the PPKS
EGI altitude outputs are taken into the position/velocity consistency
(PVC) filter into the CC. This filter uses EGI blended altitude and
blended vertical velocity to produce the system altitude (SYSG) which
provides stable and consistent data for weapons delivery computations.
For any PPKS other than EGI the system altitude (SYSB) is the
temperature corrected pressure altitude aided by FNU INS velocities.

Reference System
With the EGI selected as the PPKS EGI position and velocities are also

used for the weapons delivery computations. The FNU INS provides the
primary attitude, heading, attitude rates and accelerations.

AGD-5 D-4


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_11.jpeg:
Switches and Controls

Quite a few switches are needed to set up the AUTO delivery mode. Many
of these (PACS primarily) can be programmed using the DTM or can be
set before takeoff.

A/G Master Mode

The A/G master mode enables the bomb release circuits. It takes the
pickle button out of the A/A release circuitry. Additionally, it initiates the
A/G module and permits air-to-ground symbology to be displayed on the
HUD.

MPD/MPCD

The MPD/MPCD and its push buttons provide the means to select one of
four ARMT programs, define an AUTO program, select armament, and
select sequencing and fuzing options on the PACS. The displays and push
buttons also allow the input of weapon delivery variables, selection of
sensor hierarchy, and status display via the A/G DLVRY and associated
PROG formats. Most designation methods also require a functional
MPD/MPCD.

Master Arm Switch

The master arm must be placed in ARM to enable the release circuits,
obtain a PACS ready, and generate the HUD gun cross and mode
indicator (AUTO) in the HUD data block.

Pickle Button

In AUTO, the pickle button normally provides release consent.
Additionally, it designates a target if designation did not occur prior to
pickle.

Release Programming

Full PACS release sequencing is available. Simply establish an AUTO
program and select the desired release options. For ripple programs, the
CC computes for the center point of a string as a default, but allows the
option of defining which bomb/salvo in a string will exactly hit the target.
When this option is selected with both LC and RC stations selected,
steering will bracket the target in azimuth based on TCFT PACS loading.

D-5 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_12.jpeg:
Data Transfer Module (DTM) (Before TCTO 1F-15E-700)

During preflight, all the PACS combat and training weapons data and
four combat plus four training A/G programs can be transferred into the
aircraft through the DTM. Remember the CC will not accept DTM PACS
weapon loading data unless both the A/A and A/G combat modes are
selected.

DMS Mission Cartridge / Data Transfer Module (MC / DTM) (96-0200 and
up or after TCTO 1F-15E-700)

After the DMS is installed the DMS mission cartridge is the primary
means to read mission data to the CC and to write recorded mission
events and maintenance data from the CC.

The DTM and receptacle may also be used by the aircrew to read mission
data and write mission events and maintenance data.

Armament (ARMT)

The ARMT display on any MPD/MPCD is your access to the PACS. With
at least one loaded station boxed you can select an AUTO or CDIP
delivery option. Selecting the station enables the pull-up cue to be
displayed based on the frag of the weapon loaded. AUTO appears above
PB #6 indicating the selected PACS program is set up for the AUTO
delivery mode. After selecting single or multiple releases, quantity and
spacing options, and compatible fuzing, you will have a valid PACS
program. No legends should remain below “OPTIONS” at the bottom of
the display. Remember, once you have a program established, you can
change parameters such as quantity, interval, or fuze options at will.
Using the conventional PACS, the armament display for AUTO looks like
Figure D-2.

AGD-5 D-6


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_13.jpeg:
FUEL

LOFT 30°
TARM 6.5 SEC

2 MRM

PACS 2 SRM

DELIVERY
MODE

CBT 1C STORE

Y
[

UCAIOIOIG

AUTO RPSGL N/T
OPTIONS

atyo4 CBT 2 LCRC STORE

6

AJA CBT
AT 38'
CT R 130'

INTVL 150

Figure D - 2. Armament - AUTO.

BOMB ON
TARGET
SELECTION

BOXED
STATIONS

AGD-05-02

RDY is boxed and appears above PB #10 when the master arm switch is
moved to ARM, the PACS selections are valid, and A/G master mode is

selected.

A/G Programming

The A/G DLVRY (Figure D-3) and A/G DLVRY PROG (Figure D-4) page
formats play a significant part in CC programming. It is through these
displays that the CC determines its priority for using sensor information
to compute height above target (HAT) or height above ground (HAG) for
the vertical component of the bombing triangle. The A/G module uses this

information for bomb range and time of fall computations.

In addition, parameters that affect HUD steering displays such as loft
angle and AT/CT are input or modified through these pages. The loft
angle programmed is used by the CC to present time to the predicted
pull-up point and provide pitch steering to the climb angle desired for the
delivery. AT biases adjust the range aim point while CT biases adjust the
steering for known or observed azimuth errors.

D-7

AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_14.jpeg:
The CC also uses the time to arm and minimum recovery altitude (MRA)
programmed by the aircrew as part of its calculation for display of the

pull-up cue during delivery.

la viD2

WIND
MODEL ie)

AIG
DLVRY i)

MC/ VIDS HUD
DTM PROG

A/G DLVRY JA/G
WIND MODEL

v

A/G STORE DATA
PROGRAM PAGE
i |_|
LS
RETICLE DEPRESSION YL
L]
MINIMUM OA
RECOVERY —
ALTITUDE CH
-——T |
YL
A/G PROGRAM =
SELECTED —

©)

== [ET

PPC

MENU 2

A/G DLVRY

FUEL
1
AT

AUTO PRIOR STATUS

ou VAL
AGR SAN
sys VAL

SYSB 12384'
WIND M 270°/023
TIME 15:30:20

AUTO RPSGL NIT
QTY 04 INTVL 150° [RDY]

AIA CBT
a

Seee

CT R130'

Tw

ON

CN J
IN

— 5
iO

—
a}|

=

O

@ a |

CONT

AGD-5

A/G DELIVERY DISPLAY, A/G CBT

Figure D - 3. A/G DLVRY Page.

WEAPON DELIVERY DATA

SENSOR HIERARCHY

AGD-05-03


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_15.jpeg:
A/G STORE DATA

PROGRAM PAGE

RETICLE DEPRESSION

MINIMUM
RECOVERY
ALTITUDE

A/G PROGRAM
SELECTED

LOFT ANGLE

RANGE BIAS

AZ BIAS

PULL-UP CUE

Wind Model

NIOIOTONOUC IT

NIE TE

PAGE
AT "38"
TARM 6.5 SEC CT R130"
RET
are PRIOR STATUS
“Ty TAS) svat
AGR SAN
sys VAL

SYSB 12384'
WIND M 270°/023
TIME 15:30:20

AUTO RPSGL NIT
QTY 04 INTVL 150

\ NA CBT

A/G DLVRY PROG

AUTO PRIOR STATUS
“Tt) [AS] ~~ vAL
AGR SAN
sys VAL

WEAPON DELIVERY DATA

SENSOR HIERARCHY

AGD-05-04

Figure D - 4. A/G DLVRY PROG Page.

A wind model is available on MPD/MPCD Menu 2 for selection as a
display programming option. It allows the aircrew to input or capture
wind speed and direction at up to 10 specific altitudes. The CC uses this
data to provide a wind-corrected impact point. This information is
presented on the HUD as steering to an upwind aim point offsetting the
winds identified from the aircraft wind model.

AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_16.jpeg:
This is especially important for situations where the weapon is subjected
to wind effects for longer periods of time such as medium and high
altitude attacks or the use of high drag weapons.

The wind model data affects the computed ballistics for most A/G weapons
released in AUTO, CDIP, LADD, and CDIP GUN. It does not affect the
ballistics for any weapons released in DIRECT or MANUAL (FF/RET).
The following weapons are unaffected by wind model data in any mode:
AGM-65, GBU-24, or GBU-28.

Altitude, wind speed, and wind true direction may be entered into ten
data points by one of four methods.

e DTM or MC/DTM (96-0200 and up or after TCTO
1F-15E-700) read.

e Manually via UFC scratchpad and MPD/MPCD transfer.
e Automatic capture at programmed altitudes.
e Selective capture at the current altitude by aircrew.
When capturing winds, manual or automatic, captured data will be less
accurate when roll rate exceeds 5°/second or yaw rate exceeds 3°/second

due to wind measuring limitations. Wind data is filtered during heavy
maneuvering.

AGD-5 D-10


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_17.jpeg:
Wind Model Display

The wind model display is available as a display programming option from
MPD/MPCD Menu 2 (M2) (Figure D-5).

6

T |
Cc.

MC / VIDS AUTO
DTM PRO PT

(Ooo

sys WIND
8900 T 032°/ 020

1000 T 045°/ 020
2000 T 033°/020
4000 T 045°/018
5000 T 045°/015

ite leal emi
ee

A/GDLVRY [JA/G
WIND MODEL[2]

@ a OO

WIND MODEL AGD-05-05

Figure D - 5. Wind Model Display.

Current system altitude (same as displayed on the UFC and TGT IR
UPDT display) and true wind direction/speed are displayed near the top of
the display. OFF is shown if system altitude is invalid. The wind data is
never invalid, but may be frozen if TAS is less than 80 knots, the present
position keeping source (PPKS) is A/D, or the PPKS is TCN (86-0183
through 92-0366 before TCTO 1F-15E-737, EGD with aircrew wind data
entered on the UFC.

A table of 10 wind data points is displayed below the system altitude and
wind. A selection box is used to identify the point being entered, updated,
or deleted.

Clear Wind (CLR WIND)

Pressing PB #1 clears all wind values from the display and the wind
model. All altitudes will remain unchanged.

D-11 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_18.jpeg:
Clear All (CLR ALL)

Pressing PB #2 clears the entire wind table. It clears all altitudes and
wind directions/speed, unboxes AUTO (if boxed), the wind point number at
PB 46 is 1, and the selection box is placed at point 1.

Sort

Pressing PB #4 puts the table in order of ascending altitude. It unboxes
AUTO (if boxed) and places the selection box at the first empty data
location (altitude or wind). The selection box moves to point 1 if the table
is full.

Wind Point Number

The wind point number shows the location of the selection box. If PB #6 is
pressed with an empty scratchpad, the selection box moves to the next
data point. If PB #6 is pressed with a valid wind point number in the
scratchpad, the selection box moves to that point. AUTO becomes
unboxed when the selection box is moved manually.

Altitude

Pressing PB #8 with a valid altitude entry in the scratchpad (-99,999 thru
99,999 in 1-foot increments) puts the scratchpad altitude into the selected
point, or if the altitude already exists in the table, moves the selection box
to that point. Altitudes in the wind table are rounded to the nearest 10
feet. AUTO becomes unboxed when manually entering altitudes.

Wind

Pressing PB #10 with a valid wind speed and direction in the scratchpad
puts the scratchpad wind into the selected point. AUTO becomes unboxed
when manually entering wind. For a wind to be valid and used by the
systems for wind model calculations, it must have both an altitude and
wind speed/direction entered on the wind model display.

Wind is typed into the scratchpad as true direction (0° thru 360°), a dash
(-), and the speed in knots. Trailing zeroes are not required for the
direction. Leading zeroes are not required for speed. The dash may be
omitted if all six digits are typed.

AGD-5 D-12


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_19.jpeg:
Capture Point (CAPT PT)

Pressing PB #16 captures the current system altitude and wind, puts
them into the selection box, and moves the box to the next point. AUTO
becomes unboxed when manually commanding wind capture. CAPT PT is
not displayed if system altitude is invalid.

AUTO

Boxing PB #18 sets up the system to automatically capture at the
altitudes that have been entered into the table. It automatically sorts the
table in order of ascending altitude and puts the selection box at the first
anticipated wind point (based on altitude). As the aircraft passes each
stored altitude, the true wind direction and speed are automatically
captured and the selection box is moved to the next anticipated point.
Wind capture continues as long as PB #18 is boxed, continuously updating
every time the aircraft passes through a programmed altitude. Unbox

PB #18 to stop automatic wind capture. AUTO is automatically unboxed
anytime manual changes are made to the wind table.

At power up, AUTO is boxed by default. If system altitude is invalid,
AUTO may still be selected but wind capture will not occur.

Clear Point (CLR PT)
Pressing PB #20 clears all the data at the selected point and moves the

selection box to the next data point. AUTO becomes unboxed when a
point is manually cleared.

D-13 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGD-5, September, 1997

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_20.jpeg:
Wind Model Calculations

Wind is factored into the CC ballistics calculations in one of three ways
based on the number of wind points entered by the aircrew.

No Valid Wind Points
If there are no data points in the wind model at pickle, the CC captures

the instantaneous wind (displayed under SYS and WIND) and assumes a
linear reduction in velocity to zero knots at -4000 feet MSL (Figure D-6).

“TOIFIGIGIL &

|
1 '
' 1 AUTO
-- -- -- - 4.4000

i)

1
' 1 sys D
1

'
'

'

a

3000 T 135° /020

mit
i
i
1.
|
1
1
i
ke
I
I
i
ee ee ee
I
I
1
L
I
a
-
t
i
I
eee eee!
i
1
1
1
I
2
Ps
8
8

i
\
1 Ol
i —T —
ami ‘aaa roprocc denn 77742000 1 1000
1 2 1500
er ene ee, Meee: GE: ee cape, emer? Geren 4
pont t E fog — 3 2000 —
1
H 1 i WIND
L---4-------fi--- 4 L---4--------1--- 40 POINT 4 2500) =H
! I : 1 i ' ! I 1 ALTITUDE 5 3000
l 1 ! I a I —« —_
sen pesscefcbees sata Tn ar a i +4000 6 3500
I 1
l 1 1 1 7 4000
‘ice ial pares, PRRs Spe earne es 2000 — 8 4500 —
1
! i ! 1 9 5000
sory worn rooeyeo irra o = 18000 10 5500
1 I \
ee eee eke eee Kemer eee) Bouse Nooo Mores Uhre ggg)

©

1 \ \ \ \
40 0 10 20 -20 -10 oO 10 20 ALTITUDE

! a
:

WIND NORTH WIND EAST
(wor (iors) L | <j Jj J
WIND POINT VELOCITY

Sere ||

IMIMIM IP ~'s

AGD-05-06
Figure D - 6. No Valid Wind Point.

All steering and weapons ballistics will be calculated using the data in the
wind model. For greatest accuracy, try to build a wind model which is
most likely to reflect target area winds.

AGD-5 D-14


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_21.jpeg:
One Valid Wind Point

If there is one data point in the wind model at pickle, the CC produces a
linear interpolation from the current wind to the entered wind, and from
the entered wind to -4000 feet MSL (Figure D-7).

+f--- q

1

Y 1 1

#8 i 2
eee ee |

! ' 3 248°/ 010

1

a i oe a 4
y 1

yo 5
1

wanton aqe-- Panna 6
! '

_
weer--- 4

r 8
H 1

---b---4 9

1 ! 10
‘i 1
a Koad

~ 10 20 id - 4 ALTITUDE
WIND NORTH WIND EAST
(KNOTS) (KNOTS) Al L J jj
WIND POINT VELOCITY iI

GPP

Figure D - 7. One Valid Wind Point.

AGD-05-07

D-15 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_22.jpeg:
Multiple Valid Wind Points

If there are two or more data points in the wind model at pickle, the CC
produces a linear interpolation from current wind, through all lower
entered winds and from the lowest entered wind to -4000 feet MSL
(Figure D-8).

in pore peppy roereco ojo
1 ' 1 1 I 1 !
(i \ L t 1 !
a “4 po for---4----F- ~~ 45000
1 ' i 1 1 '
' re ee
1 i
LINEAR somboscqeog Bao r-q-wpe:--4----F--- 44000
INTER- ! t } #7 1 7 i WIND
POLATION 1 ! 1 1 i °
OF WINDS. F~~~4-~-- ----] Rano -4o---b = =~ 13000 T 135°/ 020
we ' i | 1
1 / 1
8 ' 1 1 T 035°/ 020
rf I 1 ' 1 WP ! 1 ! 2
1 1 '
i 1 2
__--W weecdlvechess bs eae eeeetbaooo 3 T 315°/010
' I 1 1 t
i F ! ; t 1 1 WIND 4
segeoed ca r---4 pect powedsee h---10 POINT 5
| l \ 1 4 ! 1 ALTITUDE
i 6
L ! L ! L Fi L 1-1000
CONSTANT. a en ty en 7 T1tov01s | &
WINDS 1 I 1 i \ ' 1 ' 8
1 i ' \ \ ' ' 9
i I 1 ; 1 \ 1 J
' 1 1 1 1 10
: iainians eine Si ro--t--44---- +---4.3000
1 1 ' 1 1 t '
i I 1 i 1 1 1 q
a Ae a | a ee, een ee er ALTITUDE
20-10 0 10 2 -20 +40 0 10 20
WIND NORTH WIND EAST
(KNOTS) (KNOTS)
WIND POINT VELOCITY

Figure D - 8. Multiple Valid Wind Points.

AGD-5 D-16


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_23.jpeg:
AUTO Delivery Symbology
HUD Symbology

The HUD (Figure D-9) provides azimuth steering information to the
target, a target symbol to visually acquire the target, and visual cues to
anticipate the computer release of the bombs.

The data block in the lower right corner of the HUD provides navigation
and weapon release data. This block contains the target identification,
ground range to the target, time to the next event, a PACS mode
indicator, and sensor being used for HAT computations. The weapon
delivery sensor will be dependent on the automatic or manual sensor
hierarchy selection and validity. The indication will include a “C” prefix
when the targeting pod is in continuous designation mode. Digital slant
range is displayed above the target identification when valid radar or
laser ranging is available. TRNG displayed at the bottom of the data
block indicates the training PACS is selected.

CMD HEADING
BUG

HEADING
CARET

AZIMUTH
STEERING LINE

LARGE

ELEVATION e
STEERING ic RETICLE
LINE

PIPPER

TD 23000 TIME TO
DIAMOND poo cag 2A INITIATE
817 a 00:05 TPULL DELIVERY
1.0 9.06 AUTO AGR MANEUVER
10 L—-- -~10
DATA BLOCK

AGD-05-09

Figure D - 9. HUD - AUTO Symbology (1).

D-17 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_24.jpeg:
Heading

The heading caret displays current heading as in all other HUD modes.
Initially, the command heading bug displays the heading to overfly the
target. After target designation, it displays the heading to fly to reach the
proper upwind release point.

A/G Reticle

The reticle is displayed coincident with the velocity vector. It consists of a
50 mil diameter solid circle and a 2 mil pipper (dot) in the center or a 25
mil circle with a 1 mil pipper selectable via the HUD repeater format at
PB #5. The pipper in AUTO mode is fixed in the center of the velocity
vector.

An analog range bar wraps around the inside of the large reticle
displaying radar or laser slant range to the target. Each clock position of
the range bar represents 1000 feet; the bar wraps around twice for a
maximum displayed range of 23,000 feet. An index on the end of the bar
indicates the range displayed. A tic mark replaces the range bar with the
small reticle displayed. The tic for ranges 0 to 11,999 feet is half the size
of the tic mark used for 12,000 to 23,000 feet. In either case, the range
bar is normally displayed if LAS or AGR is selected and valid. It is
removed if they are selected but go invalid. It is not displayed if RALT or
SYSB is selected.

Target Designator Diamond

The target designator (TD) diamond is a line of sight reference to the
designated target. The TD diamond flashes at the appropriate edge of the
HUD when the target is within 1.5° of a vertical or horizontal edge of the
HUD and continues to be displayed as long as the target is within 60° of
the nose. If the target is beyond 60° of the nose, the symbol is not
displayed.

In command of the HUD, the TD diamond can be used to designate a
target by pressing the FCP TDC and then slewing the diamond. Upon
releasing the TDC after slewing (if necessary), a target is designated at
the TD diamond LOS and the diamond is ground stabilized. If the HUD
reticle was slewed prior to designating, it is returned to the velocity
vector.

AGD-5 D-18


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_25.jpeg:
Azimuth Steering Line (ASL)

The ASL is displayed vertically relative to the earth and extends from the
top of the TD diamond to the top of the HUD. Wind effects may displace
the ASL left or right of the TD diamond. Flying to place the velocity
vector over the ASL provides steering to the wind-corrected release point.
When the target is outside the HUD field of view, the ASL is displayed at
the appropriate HUD limit. If the pattern steering line (PSL) is
designated on the A/G radar, the ASL is replaced by a bank steering bar
when outside of 15 seconds TREL.

Elevation Steering Line (ESL)

The ESL provides steering commands to achieve either a max range loft or
a specific loft angle, up to 45°, programmed on the A/G DLVRY display
format. The ESL is displayed perpendicular to the azimuth steering line
(ASL). It provides a 4 G pull-up to the selected loft angle. The ESL comes
on at five seconds TPULL and initially appears at the velocity vector
unless the TF radar is on. In this case, it appears at the pitch command
line or box. To disable the ESL, set loft angle to 0° or designate a PSL.
The ESL is unavailable when high drag weapons are selected. It is
removed when the target is overflown, aircraft G and commanded G differ
by 2.5, or weapon release is complete.

Time To Pull (TPULL)
If a loft angle is programmed, TPULL is displayed in minutes and seconds
until the pull-up is required to begin the delivery. TPULL only displays

when the aircraft heading is +60° of the heading to the target. The ESL
comes on five seconds prior to the expiration of TPULL.

D-19 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_26.jpeg:
Pull-up Cue
The pull-up cue (Figure D-10) computations include weapon dud
conditions, fragmentation damage conditions, and programmed minimum
recovery altitude to indicate a pull-up to prevent dud (D) ordnance,
frag (F) damage or the violation of MRA (M). The velocity vector should
be above the pull-up cue at release/detonation to avoid violating the
indicated condition. Do not confuse the pull-up cue with loft elevation

steering.

RELEASE CUE

AZIMUTH
STEERING
LINE

10—

5—<

PULL-UP
CUE

TIME TO
RELEASE

23000

TGT 2.A

G 38

817 00:02 TREL
AUTO AGR

20_—— —~~~20

IN CMD

25ine= — ac 25
F

PULL-UP CUE
CONDITION (F) (D) (M)

AGD-05-10

Figure D - 10. HUD - AUTO Symbology (2).

The pull-up cue is displayed for the worst case violation (largest
negative/least positive) of a pull-up cue condition. When a condition is
violated, the pull-up cue is displayed flashing above the velocity vector,
but no higher than 2° above it. If flight conditions satisfy clearance
criteria, the steady pull-up cue is displayed up to a maximum of 14° below
the velocity vector to confirm the clearance is better than desired

minimum.

AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_27.jpeg:
Pull-up Cue Condition

When the aircraft flight conditions violate the criteria (pull-up cue above
velocity vector), the condition is shown by a letter F, D, or M

(Figure D-10). When F (fragmentation envelope) or M (minimum recovery
altitude) is displayed, clearance altitudes are based on 5 G pull-up
attained in two seconds for ripple releases. The D (dud) cue, when
appropriate, is displayed for the first bomb in the release sequence and is
maintained until the pickle button is released.

The pull-up cue and condition require A/G MM for display. F and D are
shown with the master arm in ARM and weapon selected for AUTO and
CDIP modes. (F is also displayed for guided mode; D is not.) Ground
range must be less than 15 nm to the target for F. M only requires A/G
MM and aircraft altitude lower than programmed.

Release Cue

The release cue appears at 10 seconds prior to release. It is centered on
and perpendicular to the ASL, and is initially positioned 5° above the
velocity vector. As the release point is approached, the release cue moves
down the ASL. When the release cue reaches the velocity vector, release
occurs if the pickle button is being held down.

Time To Release (TREL)

TREL is displayed when TPULL expires. TREL indicates time remaining
to weapon release. TREL will be displayed when the aircraft heading is
within 20° of the ASL and 0° is entered for a loft angle (level delivery).

Time To Target (TTGT)

TTGT is displayed in all A/G modes except manual.

Time To Impact (TIMPCT)

After weapon release, TIMPCT is displayed on the HUD, on the TGT IR,
and in the TEWS and HSI NAV data blocks. (The legend “TIMPCT” is not
shown on the TEWS or HSI, just the time.) TIMPCT counts down to 0:00
in one second intervals and then displays “:_ _” for TOF plus 10% until

being removed. (The pad time for LGB and SUU-20 is 10% or 10 seconds,
whichever is greater.

D-21 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_28.jpeg:
HSI

While the HSI (Figure D-11) may not be the most desirable choice of
displays during an attack, it does display useful attack/reattack steering
information. This information may be particularly valuable in the event
of HUD failure.

— CURRENT
CO GROUND
— TRACK

CMD HDG =
OH CMD HDG
|_— MARKER
—
-—T NAV
BEARING
TI POINTER
1) y R \
A tontosx “74 7 F assy vd \'8 TST 14.
00:02:20. 00:01:48 E : NAV
-— DATA

TON ILST ILSN BLOCK

AGD-05-11

Figure D - 11. HSI.

Current ground track is displayed by the diamond near the lubber line
and the CRS readout between PBs #14 and #15.

Command heading is displayed by the command heading marker and the
CMD HDG readout between PBs #1 and #2.

Bearing to the target is displayed by the NAV bearing pointer.

The NAV data block shows the target identification, ground range and
bearing, and the ETE (or ETA) to time over target (not time to release).
TIMPCT is shown after release but is not labeled as such.

When a target is designated and the A/G master mode is selected, the
command heading is relative to the wind-corrected release point rather
than the target. The bearing on the NAV bearing pointer and the NAV
point block data are to the target’s absolute location.

AGD-5 D - 22


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_29.jpeg:
A/G Event Data

The A/G EVENT display enables the crew to review A/G weapon delivery
data, target data, and delivery parameter data. Each time the CC
generates a release, it stores this data for computed deliveries. The
EVENT format (Figure D-12) is entered by selecting EVENT (PB #19) on
MPD/MPCD Menu 1. A total of 20 events can be recorded in the CC. The
event number (PB #16) can be changed through the UFC scratchpad and
subsequent depression of PB #16; or incrementally by one to a maximum
of 20 and then back to one by depressions of PB #16.

During postflight, all the A/G event data plus additional weapons delivery
parameters can be written to the MC/DTM for analysis.

ToS <a

EVENT ENG HUD EVENT
15

©

7
al

|

A/G EVENT DATA
PACSWPN DLVRY PARAMETERS

a

(OfOTO)

BOT CTR

TGT INFO
DESG TGTP/LAS/AUTO
N 39°40.6

LONG w84"02.9
ELV

Olio

AT
CT

Seeieiel Geese

AGD-05-12

Figure D - 12. EVENT Format.

Events are written sequentially from 1 through 20. Once the twentieth
event has been written, subsequent events will start overwriting previous
events from the beginning.

D - 23 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND DELIVERY

COVER

C OMPUTED BOMBING MODES

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to the F-15E computed weapons delivery
modes. It describes the modes and leads you through the basic steps to
execute computed weapons deliveries in the F-15E.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.00. eeeccceeseeesseeceseeseesaeecesacecensaeeeesaeeessaeeseenaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eeccccccessseecceesseeeecessseeecesesaeeeceesssaeeeseesssaeeesesssaeeeseeeeaaeeseee D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ o.oo eeecceessneeesseeeeesaeecesaeeeensaeesesaeeseseeeeeaees E-1
GLOSSARY. ee eeceeesecessneecesseeecesaeecesaeecessaeecesaeeseesaeecesaaesessaeeseeaeeeneas F-1

A-1 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_30.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Cockpit displays and weapons release are a function of the chosen
A/G PACS release mode (AUTO/CDIP/DIRECT, etc.). Ifa station
with a guided weapon is selected, the CC is set to the

mode.
a. AUTO
b. GUIDED
c. CDIP
d. LADD

2. The maximum range which can be displayed on the HUD reticle
range bar is

a. 12,000 feet.
b. 12,000 meters.
c. 23,000 feet.
d. 23,000 meters.

3. A flashing TD diamond on the HUD indicates

bombs have been released.

laser ranging.

you need to make a 4 G pull-up.

the designated target is within 60° of the nose but the
diamond is HUD limited.

po op

4. If the HUD fails, which of the following provides a backup means to
perform an AUTO delivery?

a. Air-to-ground radar
b. HSI

c. Event page

d. TSD

AGD-5 D - 24


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_31.jpeg:
If the CC fails, the release pulse in AUTO or CDIP is generated by
the

a. PACS.

b. FNU INS/EGI.

c. MN.

d. N/A—computed release is inhibited when the CC fails.

If there are no data points in the wind model at pickle, the CC
captures the instantaneous winds and

a. assumes constant wind speed and direction at all altitudes.

b. assumes a linear reduction in wind velocity to zero knots at
minus 4000 feet MSL.

c. assumes the wind speed and direction is constant above the
highest point flown and constant below the lowest point
flown.

d. adjusts current system altitude to compensate for captured
wind data.

D - 25 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_32.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1 b
2. e
3 d
4 b
5 d
6 b

AGD-5 D - 26


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_33.jpeg:
AUTO DELIVERIES

AUTO is used to deliver bombs using virtually any type profile: climbing,
level, and diving. Since the CC is continuously computing bomb range
and comparing it to range to go to the designated target, the pilot has
complete use of the vertical for maneuvering. Vertical maneuvering may
take the form of level, dive, dive toss or loft delivery parameters. Azimuth
error must be nulled to hit the target.

LOFT

The LOFT climbing profile in AUTO is available for low drag, unretarded
nuclear and conventional weapons. LOFT commands are provided
automatically in the AUTO mode if a target is designated far enough out,
a pattern steering line is not designated, loft angle is not programmed for
0°, and a high drag weapon is not selected on the PACS display.

LOFT is a climbing delivery from low altitude (Figure D-13) employed to
achieve some degree of standoff with low drag weapons. After bomb
release, a hard descending turn is accomplished to get back to low altitude
and avoid overflight of the target and weapon frag. Targets may be
designated by any means; however, for pull-up deliveries, NAV, radar, and
IR are the most likely designation modes. Once A/G master mode is
selected, the HUD displays symbology for the selected delivery mode. At
designation, the CC begins computing bomb range, range to the target,
and displays attack steering.

CC calculations are done in two separate phases for a loft delivery. The
first phase begins at designation and ends at two seconds TREL. This is
the projected ballistics phase. The second phase, beginning at two seconds
TREL, and lasting until release, is called the instantaneous ballistics
phase.

D-27 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_34.jpeg:
GROUND
TRACK —+}—SA |

DESIGNATION PULLUP

2 SEC TREL
TIME TO

EVENT |+—— PROJECTED ——_} INSTANT

AGD-05-13

Figure D - 13. LOFT.

Approach

The approach to the target may be from virtually any altitude or heading.
Normally, the approach is from very low altitude. After designating a
target and going to A/G master mode, azimuth steering is available via
the command heading bug and the ASL. In addition to range, the CC also
computes the time to reach the pull-up point and displays it as TPULL in
the HUD data block if the target is within 60° of the nose. At five seconds
TPULL an elevation steering line appears.

The projected ballistics phase assumes the aircraft speed and altitude will
be the same at TPULL = 0 as they are during the run-in. Assuming a
constant power pull (MIL power) and deceleration during the climb, the
CC projects the effect of pulling up at 4 Gs to the programmed loft angle.
This yields a bomb range and TOF, TPULL and bomb trajectory to fine
tune the max loft angle for present and projected conditions.

Pull-up

At TPULL =0, the ESL programs a 2 Gs/second buildup (Figure D-14) to
4 Gs in order to release at the desired loft angle. If the ESL is followed,
release occurs with G on the aircraft.

AGD-5 D - 28


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_35.jpeg:
The instantaneous ballistics phase uses feedback from the current aircraft
load factor to calculate an elevation steering error. If the pilot is
underpulling, the ESL is placed higher on the HUD. If the pilot overpulls
the steering, the ESL is positioned lower to achieve the programmed
parameters.

The bomb is released when instantaneous ballistics indicate the selected
weapon will hit the target. This may not coincide with programmed
parameters, and may occur before the selected parameters are achieved.
The overriding concern is to get the bomb on target.

15
x 12.5 rf} 10 —

5

IN CMD 5Le-- 45 TGT 2.A
G 3.7

817 00:21 TREL

AUTO RALT

10 -—-- -~10 F

AGD-05-14

Figure D - 14. LOFT - Pull-up.

Tracking

Tracking is a matter of following both the ESL and ASL until bomb
release. This means placing the velocity vector over the steering lines.
The ASL, in particular, is quite sensitive, and it may be easier to follow
the command steering on the HUD or HSI initially. Once the velocity
vector is on or near the ASL, transition to it for steering. With the
steering properly aligned, the TD diamond is still over the target, the ASL
steers you to a point upwind from the target, and the aircraft is crabbed
into the wind.

D - 29 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_36.jpeg:
Release

At 15 seconds TREL the radar is pointed at the designated target and A/G
ranging begins automatically if AUTO or AGR is the priority sensor and a
NAV or radar designation is used. If TPULL is being computed, the CC
predicts TREL based on TPULL pull-up maneuver time, and automatic
A/G ranging occurs when the predicted TREL is equal to 15 seconds. (For
a BDU-33 max range loft, this occurs at about 8 seconds TPULL.) This is
verified by the appearance of a range bar in the reticle which indicates
slant range to the target. At 10 seconds TREL, the release cue appears on
the ASL above the velocity vector. When it reaches the velocity vector, the
CC generates a release pulse; and, if the pickle button is being held down,
the bomb is released (Figure D-15). Before the release cue reaches the
velocity vector, you should check the pull-up cue to be sure it is below your
velocity vector. This ensures you will clear the weapon frag and allow
time to arm the fuzes. Release is inhibited if the velocity vector is not
within 20° of the ASL or if pickle occurred inside of release range. When
the last release pulse is generated, the reticle flashes and TREL changes
to TIMPCT unless a nuclear bomb was released. If a nuke was released,
TREL changes to TBURST.

Error Analysis

Two conditions may result in not achieving the desired/max range loft
programmed. One is underpulling (lagging the ESL), and the second is
increasing thrust at zero TPULL or during the pull-up. Both result in
placing the aircraft closer to the target than projected when the desired
loft angle is achieved, either of which would result in a long bomb. So an
early release must occur to hit the target.

Overpulling is a set of conditions where the bomb would fall short if
released at the max loft angle. This results from the max loft angle being
achieved further up range from the target than the projected point. The
bomb may not be released. This no release condition may be corrected by
bunting the aircraft over or significantly easing off on the pull until
release occurs.

AGD-5 D - 30


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_37.jpeg:
If standoff from a max range delivery is the primary concern, consider the
following.

6 Anticipate the ESL rise, and be prepared to pull up at

TPULL = 0.

e Track the ESL as carefully as possible to avoid leading or
lagging.

e Set the throttles (constant thrust) and maintain a constant

altitude on run-in, to allow the projected calculations to
accurately mirror the actual aircraft conditions.

e If no release occurs, bunt over until release and complete the
planned maneuver/recovery.

FLASHING
(AT RELEASE)

19540

IN CMD 35r-—_| —135 TGT 2.A
G 3.2
802 00:02 TREL

AUTO AGR

AGD-05-15

Figure D - 15. LOFT - Release.

D-31 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_38.jpeg:
Egress

After the bombs are released, roll to 135° of bank and pull the nose back
down below the horizon. After about 135° of turn, the target is behind you
and you should roll out to generate maximum separation from weapon
effects.

Reattack

Whether bombs are released or not, as long as the target remains
designated and A/G master mode remains selected, steering continues to
the target. This allows the crew to have immediate steering back to the
target in the event a reattack is required. The ASL is stuck to one side or
the other of the HUD and the TD diamond is removed. When the airplane
is once again turned toward the target and the target is within 60° of the
nose, the TD diamond returns. When the attack is complete, select the
NAV master mode or undesignate and the steering should auto-sequence
to the next steer point (if auto-sequencing is enabled).

Level
The level attack profile provides an accurate means to lay down ordnance

in all types of weather. As far as displays are concerned, the level attack
is very similar to the LOFT attack (Figure D-16).

GROUND
TRACK 7

DESIGNATE RELEASE

AGD-05-16

Figure D - 16. AUTO - Level.

AGD-5 D - 32


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_39.jpeg:
Approach

The approach to the target may be from any altitude or direction. The
attack steering is based on present position direct to the target or via a
crew selected attack heading if pattern steering is designated. As with the
LOFT attack, once the target is designated, command heading on the
HUD and HSI is the heading to fly in order to reach the wind-corrected
release point (Figure D-17). Once the gross steering corrections are made,
keep the velocity vector centered on the ASL. If 0° is the selected loft
angle, TPULL and the ESL are not displayed and TREL is displayed on
the HUD. Elevation steering is inhibited for those weapons that are
programmed for non-LOFT delivery profiles, such as high drag bombs and
AGMs; otherwise if a LOFT angle is programmed, then HUD cues for a
LOFT delivery will initially be displayed. At five seconds TPULL the ESL
appears, but in this case, do not follow it when it begins to program up.
After five seconds, the ESL is removed from the HUD if the elevation
steering is not followed.

If a loft angle other than 0° is selected for a level delivery, expect a delay
in the TREL computation and a possible jump in the ASL as the CC
compensates for the change in release conditions when the ESL is
removed. It is very important to be mindful of weapon frag in this mode.

13 ‘h 15
LLiiititpiriiiiiy

5 r—|—5

540 15
10

12.5

LL. —J

Fite eed § TGT 2.A

G 10.0
817 01:03 TREL
AUTO RALT

10 --- -~4110

AGD-05-17

Figure D - 17. AUTO - Approach.

D - 33 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)
1. Identify the attributes of the auto mode.
2. Identify the attributes of the CDIP mode.
3. Interpret air-to-ground HUD, ARMT, and wind model displays.

4. Identify the steps to perform climbing, level, and diving deliveries
using the auto mode.

5. Identify the steps to perform climbing, level, and diving deliveries

using the CDIP mode.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I UFC A/G Weapon Submenu
Data Transfer Module
DTM and A/G Event Data
Air-to-Ground Bombing

Section II Attack Bombs and Dispensers

Post Flight Procedures

AFTTP 3-3 Vol XVII Computed Bombing

AGD-5 B-1


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_40.jpeg:
Tracking

The primary task in tracking the target is to keep the velocity vector
centered on the ASL. At 15 seconds TREL, the radar automatically goes
to the air-to-ground ranging mode (depending on the designation source
and priority sensor). Ranging is pointed through the TD diamond. The
crew should look for the presence of the release cue and TREL to know
when they are within the 20° cone and should also be aware of the time
remaining to release to know when to concentrate their effort to zero out
any steering error. If the steering error is greater than 20°, the release
cue and TREL are not displayed on the HUD and weapon release is
inhibited.

It is also extremely important at this time to check the pull-up cue to be

sure it is below the velocity vector. Weapon release is not inhibited by
values of pull-up or ground clearance.

AGD-5 D - 34


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_41.jpeg:
Release

The pickle button may be depressed anytime after the target is
designated. At 10 seconds TREL, the release cue appears and begins to
track down toward the velocity vector (Figure D-18). When the release
cue reaches the velocity vector, release occurs if the pickle button is being
held down. When the last bomb is released, the reticle flashes and TREL
changes to TIMPCT, TTGT or TBURST depending on the type weapon
released.

The release pulse is inhibited in the AUTO mode if the pickle button is
pressed after the center of the pattern is past.

14 15
bpiiiiiity
4s

5 —|-15

10 —

i

—

7500

IN CMD 5.45 TGT 2.A
G 12
817 00:03 TREL

AUTO AGR

10 --- -~410

AGD-05-18

Figure D - 18. AUTO - Release.

Egress

After release, fly the safe escape maneuver used in planning the delivery.
Failure to do so will increase the potential for frag damage.

Reattack
Target designation and attack steering is retained for purposes of reattack
until the master mode is changed from A/G or the target is undesignated

(auto-sequencing enabled). If auto-sequencing is disabled, steering to
target is retained regardless of master mode or designation status.

D-35 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_42.jpeg:
Diving

The diving attack using the AUTO mode may be accomplished with or
without a predesignated target. All the cockpit indications are virtually
the same.

Designated

If a target is designated by radar or some other means, the attack can be
accomplished like any other type of diving attack; the velocity vector is
placed over an aim-off point and dive angle is maintained until bomb
release (Figure D-19).

cron? hy | a

DESIGNATE RELEASE

AGD-05-19

Figure D - 19. AUTO Dive (Designated).

Once the target is designated, by whatever means, the dive angle need no
longer be maintained. With the velocity vector/reticle centered on the
ASL, a 2-4 G pull can be initiated. The CC releases the weapon at the
proper range to hit the target. With the proper planning, this occurs near
level flight. Once the weapon is released, the desired escape maneuver
can be performed. This entire delivery process is called a long range dive
toss (LRDT).

AGD-5 D - 36


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_43.jpeg:
Approach: The approach to the target is like any other dive attack. You
must get into a position from which you can acquire the target and deliver
ordnance and recover by minimum altitude for ground and frag clearance.

Tracking: Tracking depends somewhat on whether the target is
designated before or after the dive begins. If the target is designated
before the dive, tracking amounts to rolling out on final with the velocity
vector centered on the ASL and pressing the pickle button (Figure D-20).

§L--|~-45

8480

IN CMD 15L-—t “4 ~ 115 TGT 2.A
G 1.3
-820 L- — 00:07 TREL

AUTO LAS
20_-—-— ~~~20

AGD-05-20

Figure D - 20. AUTO Dive (Designated).

D - 37 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_44.jpeg:
Undesignated

If a target is not designated prior to the roll in (Figure D-21), designation
may be accomplished by placing the velocity vector over the desired target
and pressing the pickle button (Figure D-22).

GROUND , 14

TRACK
DESIGNATE RELEASE

AGD-05-21

Figure D - 22. AUTO Dive (Undesignated).

+
10e.- 4 10

AUTO AGR

25L—-— ~~125

AGD-05-22

Figure D - 21. AUTO Dive Rollin (Undesignated).

AGD-5 D - 38


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_45.jpeg:
Roll out on final and position the velocity vector over the target and press
the pickle button; this designates the target (Figure D-23). After the
target is designated, the steering looks like any other AUTO attack.

By virtue of having to put the velocity vector/pipper on the target to
designate, the dive angle must be decreased for release to occur. This may
mean shallowing the dive angle by tracking the aim-off point after
designation for a diving delivery or initiating a 2-4 G pull for a dive toss
delivery.

19000

TGT

G 3.0
00:08 TREL
AUTO AGR

25L—— —~125

AGD-05-23

Figure D - 23. AUTO Dive (Designated).

D - 39 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_46.jpeg:
Release: Regardless of when the target is designated, once designation
occurs and the velocity vector is placed at 12 o’clock to the target, the
release phase of the delivery is the same (Figure D-24). While it is not
necessary to keep the pickle button down from designation to release, it is
necessary to have the button down when release range is reached. For
most diving attacks, this means the pickle is continuous from pipper
designation through release.

4390
TGT
G 7
00:02 TREL
AUTO AGR

AGD-05-24

Figure D - 24. AUTO Dive - Release.

AGD-5 D - 40


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_47.jpeg:
Egress: Execute the planned dive recovery/safe escape maneuver.

Reattack: Steering for the diving attack is like any other AUTO profile.

SL-- --45 TGT7.A

G 5.1
00:27 TREL
AUTO CLAS

10 -—- -~10

AGD-05-25

Figure D - 25. Pattern Steering Line Enabled.

When the pattern steering line (PSL) is enabled, the ASL is replaced on
the HUD by the PSL (Figure D-25) as long as the PSL heading is within
roughly +30° of the target bearing. Otherwise the ASL straight-in
steering is used. When available, the PSL attempts to provide alignment
for wings level steering on the PSL selected heading for the last 15
seconds of the attack. The ASL returns at 15 seconds TREL (or when the
aircrew undesignates the PSL).

D-41 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_48.jpeg:
Crew Coordination

For an AUTO attack, the WSO is primarily interested in designating the
target through the best means available while the pilot is primarily
concerned with flying the attack profile. The pilot selects A/G master
mode and turns the master arm on. The WSO checks the PACS for proper
programming and a RDY indication. If required, he turns the VTRS on.
Once the WSO gets his final designation with the A/G radar and has
cleared the target area with the A/A radar, he may tell the pilot to take
command of the HUD. If the pilot sees the target approaching and the
WSO has not cleared him to take command, he advises the WSO and then
takes command, if required.

If the WSO is using the targeting IR and plans on redesignating the
target, he informs the pilot because of possible jumps in the ASL. The
pilot evaluates the WSO’s designation through the HUD, if able, and must
be ready to make a visual designation, if required, or make azimuth
corrections as necessary. At approximately five seconds TREL (for other
than visual designations) the pilot pushes down on the pickle button to
give release consent. After release he flies the planned safe escape
maneuver while the WSO clears the area visually and/or with the radar.

Error Analysis
Probably the most significant questions to answer are whether the TD
diamond was over the target and the velocity vector over the ASL at

release.

Steering Error

If the velocity vector was not over the ASL at release, the next question is
why not. If it was because of late designation, attempt to designate
earlier. If it was due to control technique, try using the command heading
for gross heading changes then the ASL for final small corrections. An
error in following the ESL should not normally cause a bomb range error,
simply a change in the release point.

AGD-5 D - 42


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_49.jpeg:
System Error

If the TD diamond was over the target with the velocity vector glued to
the ASL and the bomb still did not hit the target, the system has an error.
If EGI (after TCTO 1F-15E-737) is installed and EGI is the PPKS, check
to see if it has stopped tracking satellites. The EGI present position and
SYSG inputs should remain usable for short periods. Select INS or MN
PPKS for SYSB after longer periods of lost track. FNU INS and MN
information will become more accurate.

Before TCTO 1F-15E-737 or if INS or MN is the PPKS, check the INS and
MN for a velocity or altitude error and update as necessary. The mission
navigator should be updated as close to designation as possible. If there is
no appreciable MN or INS error some other system aiming error is likely
the culprit. If you are satisfied the error is constant and predictable,
compensate by adjusting the designation, if possible or adjusting the along
track and/or cross track values on the A/G DLVRY format.

A/G Event Data

On the range, A/G events may be reviewed on downwind. The crew can
review delivery parameters including steering deviations. CTBE gives the
distance from the ASL at release and is valuable in determining auto
steering errors.

D - 43 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read the references in TO 1F-15E-34-1-1, Sections I and II.

3. Read AFTTP 3-3 bombing chapters.

C-1 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_50.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Which of the following modes are normally used for climbing
profiles?
a. AUTO and CDIP
b. AUTO
c. CDIP
d. AUTO and DIRECT

2. In AUTO, after a radar designation and loft angle is equal to 0°,
air-to-ground radar ranging begins automatically

a. at 15 nm from the target.
b. at 15 seconds TREL, if priority sensor is AGR or AUTO.
c. at 15 seconds TPULL.
d. as soon as the A/G master mode is selected.
3. In AUTO, release occurs when the release cue reaches
a. the TD diamond.
b. the ESL.
c. the velocity vector.
d. the ASL.
5. In AUTO, in order for release to occur, which of the following must
be true?
a. The velocity vector must be within 20° of the ASL.
b. The pickle button must not be depressed until after the
reticle flashes.
G. The velocity vector must overlay the TD diamond.
d. The pipper must overlay the target.

AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_51.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 45 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_52.jpeg:
CDIP
CDIP Mode Description

The CDIP mode uses the same set of equations as AUTO to compute bomb
range and TOF. The main difference between the modes is in the display.

In CDIP, the current bomb range is used to determine the position of the
pipper. The pipper contained in the reticle is an aiming index. Pickle
always designates the point behind the pipper as a target in CDIP even if
a previous designation existed at pickle. If the pipper position becomes
HUD limited, the reticle is displayed at the HUD limit along with the time
to release to cause the bomb to impact at the spot on the ground under the
pipper. This is called a saturated HUD. A saturated HUD is referred to
as having “time in the sight.”

Because CDIP displays are normally for instantaneous release on the
pickle point, climbing/loft maneuvers are not feasible. Toss deliveries are
possible under conditions where the reticle is saturated; i.e., HUD limited.

Equipment (86-0183 through 92-0366 before TCTO 1F-15E-737,
Embedded GPS/INS)

In order to effectively use the CDIP mode, the CC, MPDP, HUD,
MPD/MPCD, PACS, ADC, and FNU INS or AHRS must be functional.

Central Computer (CC)

Unlike AUTO where weapon impact point computation begins with target
designation, the CC begins impact point computations when CDIP is
selected.

Display Processor

The MPDP is the device which creates all the symbology for display on the
HUD and MPD.

AGD-5 D - 46


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_53.jpeg:
HUD

The HUD is the device which presents the steering information and other
delivery cues to the pilot.

Multipurpose Display

A MPD/MPCD is needed to gain access to the PACS. It may also be used
to obtain steering information from a HSI or ADI.

Information pertinent to a CDIP delivery is presented on the HUD and a
MPD (ARMT and A/G DLVRY displays). A limited amount of steering
information is available on the HSI and ADI. Unlike AUTO, without the
HUD, you do not have enough information to complete the attack.

PACS

The PACS is used to build the delivery program. A CDIP program may be
set up to include the stations, sequencing options, and fuzing options.
AUTO display symbology as a result of a designation with an AUTO
PACS program may be changed to CDIP symbology via HOTAS.

Air Data Computer

The ADC deposits data into the CC data base for use by the A/G module.
Some of the information is required for the ballistics computations. Other
information is used if the mission NAV determines that information is the
best source.

Attitude Reference
The INS and AHRS also deposit information into the CC data base to be

used as required by the mission NAV and the A/G module. Essentially,
attitude, velocity, and acceleration data are provided.

D - 47 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_54.jpeg:
Equipment (96-0200 and up or after TCTO 1F-15E-737, Embedded
GPS/INS)

The central computer, multipurpose display processor, head-up display,
multipurpose display/color display and programmable armament control
set remain essentially the same. However, the air data computer and
reference system have changed.

Air Data Processor (ADP)

The air data computer has been replaced by the ADP. This change is
transparent to the operator. The system altitude is present position
keeping source (PPKS) selection dependent. With the EGI as the PPKS
EGI altitude outputs are taken into the position/velocity consistency
(PVC) filter into the CC. This filter uses EGI blended altitude and
blended vertical velocity to produce the system altitude (SYSG) which
provides stable and consistent data for weapons delivery computations.
For any PPKS other than EGI the system altitude (SYSB) is the
temperature corrected pressure altitude aided by FNU INS velocities.

Reference System
With the EGI selected as the PPKS EGI position and velocities are also
used for the weapons delivery computations. The FNU INS provides the

primary attitude, heading, attitude rates and accelerations.

Switches and Controls

There are many switches involved in setting up the CDIP delivery mode.
Many of the switches, those associated with the PACS primarily, can be
programmed using the DTM or set before takeoff. Additionally, there are
two ways to enter the CDIP mode.

A/G Master Mode

The A/G master mode enables the bomb release circuits. Additionally, it
permits air-to-ground symbology to be displayed on the HUD.

AGD-5 D - 48


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_55.jpeg:
FCP Castle Switch

This switch is used to take command of the HUD. Command is required
to get AGR in the PACS CDIP mode and to permit auto acq switching to
the CDIP mode from PACS AUTO mode.

MPD/MPCD

The MPD and its push buttons are your means to set up a CDIP or AUTO
program, select armament, and select sequencing and fuzing options. A/G
DLVRY inputs will adjust the CC aim point just as in AUTO as well as
allow sensor selection and pull-up cue condition inputs.

Master Arm Switch

The master arm must be placed in ARM to enable the release circuits,
obtain a PACS ready, and provide a gun cross and mode indicator on the
HUD.

Pickle Button

The pickle button normally initiates release. Additionally, it always
designates a target at the current pipper position in CDIP.

Release Programming

Full PACS release sequencing is available. Simply establish a CDIP or
AUTO program and select the desired release options. For ripple
programs, the CC computes for the center point of the string by default.
Minimum release interval considerations are the same as for AUTO.

D - 49 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_56.jpeg:
Armament

You can bring up an ARMT display (Figure D-26) on any MPD/MPCD.
You must have a CDIP or AUTO program selected with at least one
loaded station boxed. You must also have a RDY indication next to

PB #11. Remember, once you have a program established, you can change
parameters such as quantity, interval, or fuze options at will.

LOVOMOVO"O!
| | |
( ret V

LOW BOT
510M ee TR

A/A CMBT
LOFT 0° AT 38
TARM 6.5 SEC CT R130°
AIA

QTY 12 INTVL 290

CBT 1C STORE

PACS DELIVERY PROG 1 CBT 2 IREYLON MENU
MODE CDIP RP MPL TAIL RDY
OPTIONS

eee

Figure D - 26. Armament - CDIP.

PACS READY
CUE

AGD-05-26

AGD-5 D - 50


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_57.jpeg:
CDIP Delivery Symbology

The HUD (Figure D-27) displays a 50 mil reticle with the 2 mil pipper (or
a 25 mil reticle with a 1 mil pipper) at the predicted bomb impact point.
The reticle is connected to the velocity vector by a displayed impact line
(DIL). The reticle may contain a range bar if the pilot takes command of
the HUD and LAS or AGR is available.

LLL tit ttt titty)

+
10 L--- ~-#10

PULL-UP
CUE

RETICLE

2000
NAV 3A
N 2.3

CDIP AGR

25L-- ~~.125

AGD-05-27

Figure D - 27. HUD - CDIP Symbology.

The computer calculates and displays a DIL to aid the pilot in flying a
course line projected through the target. The pilot steers so the target
appears to move along the DIL towards the reticle and applies the release
signal when the pipper crosses the target. The release signal designates
the target and initializes the AUTO display.

The computations of weapon ballistics and the HUD reticle position are
started when the CDIP mode is selected. Selection may be from a CDIP or
AUTO PACS program. If a CDIP program is used, the legend in the lower
right corner reads CDIP and tells which sensor is being used for HAT
computations. If CDIP is entered from AUTO (by taking command of the
HUD and thumbing aft on the FCP auto acq switch), the legend reads
AUTO but the rest of the symbology is obviously CDIP until pickle.

D-51 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_58.jpeg:
If the impact point is outside the HUD field of view, the reticle is
displayed at the HUD limit along with a time to release (TREL), and the
point under the pipper is still the predicted impact point. Because the
computed impact point for the bomb range would occur under the nose,
the pipper is positioned on the HUD to show where the bombs will
eventually hit if the pickle button is pressed right now (designation). An
AUTO symbology is displayed until multiple or delayed releases are
complete.

Displayed Impact Line (DIL)

The DIL provides an azimuth steering reference to aid in positioning the
reticle on the target. It is limited to the edge of the reticle to allow clearer
viewing of objects in the reticle.

When the pickle button is pressed, the CDIP display is terminated until

the pickle button is released. The AUTO delivery display is used while
the pickle button is held, including all HUD symbols.

AGD-5 D - 52


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_59.jpeg:
CDIP Deliveries

CDIP is the primary visual delivery mode. It can be employed with or
without a target designation prior to the final attack. The point under the
pipper is always designated the target at pickle. At pickle, the display
looks just like AUTO until the pickle button is released.

Climbing

While a climbing attack is possible from CDIP, it is not the normal profile.
In the event the reticle is HUD limited and a TREL is displayed, it is
possible to place the pipper on the target, press the pickle button, and
begin a pull-up. Due to the ranges involved, this should result in a very
quick release.

Level

The level attack is normally conducted from low altitude but can be
accomplished from any altitude (Figure D-28). If the HUD reticle is
displayed at the HUD limit, TREL is displayed in the data block and is
your only clue that release will be delayed. Designation is not required
prior to final attack but may aid in target acquisition.

GROUND /
TRACK

DESIGNATE RELEASE

AGD-05-28

Figure D - 28. CDIP Level.

D-53 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-5 C-2


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_60.jpeg:
Approach

Depending on the type target, the approach to the target may be at very
low altitude with a climb to delivery altitude just prior to release. If the
target is such that detection is very difficult, it may be necessary to climb
slightly to acquire the target and deliver in a very shallow dive.
Cross-check the pull-up cue and be sure you are above the weapon frag.

A prior designation may enhance the pilot’s visual acquisition of the
target. A target designation may also be used to stabilize the CDIP
reticle. When there is no target designated, target altitude is computed
from laser range, AGR, SYSG (96-0200 and up or after TCTO 1F-15E-737,
EGI), radar altimeter, or system barometric (SYSB) altitude. Terrain
altitude variation is continuously used in computing the impact point.
Rough or hilly terrain results in a changing CDIP display. When a target
is designated the vertical component relative to the target is used to
compute bomb range and position the pipper. This results in a stabilized
display.

Tracking

Tracking is by visual means until a target is designated. You should
maneuver the airplane to place the DIL over the target and allow the
target to move down the DIL to the pipper (Figure D-29). If a target is
designated by some means other than the pipper, command heading is
available and the TD diamond marks the target.

AGD-5 D- 54


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_61.jpeg:
10

TGT 2.A
G 4.0

CDIP RALT

AGD-05-29

Figure D - 29. CDIP Level - Tracking.

Release

When the pickle button is pressed, the point under the pipper is
designated. If a target had been previously designated, the designation is
changed to the point under the pipper (Figure D-30).

10

G 1.0
00:00 TREL
CDIP RALT

AGD-05-30

Figure D - 30. CDIP Level - Pickle.

D-55 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_62.jpeg:
As the pickle button is pressed, the HUD display changes to an AUTO
display. Press and hold the pickle button until after the reticle begins
flashing. Due to ballistics, multiple releases, and HUD limits, the
release(s) may not occur immediately.

If the CDIP reticle had been HUD limited at pickle, TREL is displayed,
and bomb release does not occur until TREL 0:00. While the pickle button
is held down, the AUTO display provides wind-corrected steering for the
interval between pickle and generation of the last release pulse or for
delayed releases (Figure D-31).

FLASHING

10

9120
TGT 2.A

G 1.0
00:07 TTGT
CDIP AGR

AGD-05-31

Figure D - 31. CDIP Level - Release.

Egress

Execute the planned safe escape maneuver. If a loaded station is selected
(bombs remaining) and CDIP was entered from a CDIP program, when
the pickle button is released, the display returns to CDIP. (If you entered
CDIP from AUTO by use of the auto acq switch, the AUTO display
remains after the pickle button is released until you again thumb aft on
the auto acq.)

AGD-5 D - 56


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_63.jpeg:
Reattack

The designation is held by the CC to help relocate the target should a
reattack be necessary. Command heading is available on the HUD and
HSI. The TD diamond is also present when the target is once again in the
HUD field of view. Depending on the pickle button, station loading, and
PACS programming, an ASL may be available to aid in reattack steering.

Diving

The diving attack is readily accomplished using CDIP (Figure D-32). You
must fly your airplane to a position from which you can roll in, track,
pickle, and recover without hitting the ground or the weapon frag. This is
the same thing you do for a noncomputed delivery. The computer simply
refines your accuracy.

GROUND Jf.
TRACK

DESIGNATE RELEASE

AGD-05-32

Figure D - 32. CDIP Dive.

D-57 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_64.jpeg:
Approach

The approach is from any altitude as dictated by the threat. Steering is to
the current steer point which may or may not be a target. The approach
has all the flexibility of any other diving attack. Once rollout is
accomplished with the velocity vector on the aim-off point, attempt to
maintain a constant dive angle until release (Figure D-33).

ny ae
+

Bien

NAV 2A

N 3.4
00:00 TREL
CDIP RALT

AGD-05-33

Figure D - 38. CDIP Dive - Approach.

Tracking

At rollout, the target is between the pipper and the velocity vector.
Whether the target is closer to the pipper or closer to the velocity vector
depends on dive angle, track time, and ordnance ballistics. These are the
same things that determine IPP (initial pipper placement) for manual dive
bomb. Tracking consists of maintaining the velocity vector on the aim-off
point and killing target drift. Drift is nulled by flying the airplane to place
the DIL over the target. As altitude decreases during the dive, the DIL
shortens and the target appears to track along the DIL to the pipper.
When the pipper is superimposed over the target, press the pickle button.
The HUD display changes to an AUTO display until the pickle button is
released.

AGD-5 D -58


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_65.jpeg:
Release

The TD diamond appears at the pipper (Figure D-34). The ASL is
displayed to help maintain a ground track through the target. The reticle
jumps to the velocity vector and the data block destination changes to
TGT. When the last bomb is released, the reticle flashes.

13 14 15
a
+

§L-- ~-45

TGT
G 1.1

00:00 TREL
CDIP RALT

AGD-05-34

Figure D - 34. CDIP Dive - Pickle.

Egress

After the last bomb is released, execute the planned dive recovery/safe
escape maneuver.

Reattack

When the pickle button is released the HUD display returns to the CDIP
display. Once again, the designation is retained for the purpose of
reattack should it be necessary. The command heading is displayed on
the HUD and HSI.

D -59 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_66.jpeg:
Crew Coordination

During the CDIP attack, the pilot is concerned with visually navigating to
and acquiring the target. How much coordination is required before going
to CDIP depends to some extent on how CDIP is entered. If entered from
AUTO, the pilot must take command of the HUD, which also takes the
radar to AGR. A second act of taking command of the HUD points the
targeting pod through the CDIP pipper.

If CDIP is entered through a PACS program, the radar and IR are
available to the WSO until the pilot takes command of the HUD to get
AGR.

In any event, if the pilot wants to use the radar designation to help locate
the target during a CDIP pass, he must wait until the WSO has at least
frozen a usable map prior to taking command of the HUD or use some
other means of designation.

Error Analysis

As in all error analysis, you must first answer the question of where the
pipper was at pickle. If not on the target, put it there the next pass. If
you made a lateral error, attempt to get the DIL over the target as soon as
possible. If the DIL is not over the target as you approach pickle, it is fair
to use a small amount of bank to put it there. If the error was in range,
ask yourself if you held a constant dive angle through the pass. If you pull
the pipper up to the target, range accuracy is degraded because of CC
solution time.

If you do not have command of the HUD during a CDIP pass, neither
radar nor laser range is available. If this is the case, IN CMD is not
displayed, and there is no range bar in the reticle. If you significantly
deviate from planned parameters, the CC still solves the bombing problem
but possibly at the expense of frag and/or ground clearance.

AGD-5 D - 60


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_67.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Which of the following is true concerning CDIP deliveries?

You can only accomplish a CDIP delivery from a PACS CDIP
program.

You can only accomplish a CDIP delivery from a PACS
AUTO program (you must thumb aft).

You can accomplish a CDIP delivery from either an AUTO or
a CDIP program.

You can accomplish an AUTO delivery from a PACS CDIP
program (you must thumb aft).

In CDIP, to have an AGR range bar displayed on the reticle

pe op

the pilot must be in command of the radar.
the WSO must be in command of the radar.
the pilot must be in command of the HUD.
the WSO must be in command of the TGT IR.

After pickling in CDIP with the pickle button held down, the HUD

display

a. remains the same as before.

b. changes to an AUTO display postdesignate.
Gc. changes to a DIRECT display.

d. goes blank until the pickle button is released.

Which of the following is true concerning CDIP?

a.

Although primarily a visual mode, CDIP does have excellent
capability in a nonvisual environment.

CDIP is the primary visual delivery mode.

When attacking a previously designated target, the system
converts to AUTO at pickle and the weapon will impact the
previously designated target.

Climbing deliveries may be accomplished in CDIP but only
when attacking a previously designated target (designated
CDIP).

D-61 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_68.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. c
2. c
3 b
4 b

AGD-5 D - 62


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_69.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

In AUTO (conventional weapons) bombs are released based on

po op

elapsed time.
bomb time of fall.
bomb range.
aircraft altitude.

Assuming the radar is turned on and is the priority sensor, it goes
into air-to-ground ranging during an AUTO attack (assume a radar
designation and 0° loft angle set)

ao op

only if the pilot takes command of the HUD.
automatically at 15 seconds TREL.
automatically at 15 nm from the target.
only if the laser is not firing.

The primary HUD indication of weapon release is a flashing

ao op

TD diamond.

gun cross diamond.
reticle.

velocity vector.

During an AUTO attack you have passed over the target. How do
you get steering back to the target for a reattack?

a.
b.
c.

You must deselect and reselect the A/G master mode.

You must undesignate and redesignate the target.

Simply follow the current command steering but you must
provide your own turning room.

You must select a new PACS program to reintialize the system.

E-1 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
CENTRAL COMPUTER A/G PROCESSING
A/G Module

In the F-15E, all air-to-ground weapon release computations are
accomplished by the A/G module (Figure D-1) in the central computer
(CC). Within the CC, the A/G module interacts with the navigation
(NAV), flight director (FD), and controls and displays (C&D) software
modules and data bases. These modules, in turn, pass information to and
from other avionics systems.

The A/G module functions only when the A/G master mode is selected and
uses a generic set of ballistics equations to compute weapon time of fall
and range. These computations include rack characteristics and specific
weapon characteristics stored in the PACS. The CC compensates for CFT
station location and weapon lateral departure angle. If a ripple release
program is set, default computations and steering information are for the
string center point. The aircrew may request an aim point to select a
specific bomb to hit the target. Wind, coriolis, and separation effects are
accounted for by adjusting the steering aim point for the computed miss
distance. Wind is factored into the CC ballistics calculations based on a
wind model.

LEGEND
EGI 2
[____] CC MEMORY AHRS 1 EXEC
[___] AVIONICS SYSTEMS [ADC 1]
ADC 1
[5] SOFTWARE MODULES ADP 2
[7] sensors RADAR eo[ nay fe
1. (86-0183 THRU 92-0366 FNU INS
BEFORE TCTO 1F-15E-737)
DATA
2. (96-0200 AND UP AFTER PACS <> <>| Base [<>] A/G
TCTO 1F-15E-737)
TGT POD
COCKPIT CONTROLS |—» > Pare
DISPLAYS —_]<—»[_MPDP | -

AGD-05-01

Figure D - 1. A/G Module.
D-1 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_70.jpeg:
5. Tracking during an AUTO attack is achieved by
until the last weapon is released.

a. keeping the waterline symbol superimposed on the ASL and
ESL (if present)

b. keeping the velocity vector superimposed on the ASL and ESL

(if present)

keeping the ASL superimposed over the TD diamond

d. keeping the velocity vector superimposed on the TD diamond

°

6. In CDIP, if TREL is displayed,

a. _ the reticle is HUD limited and the predicted bomb impact is not

displayed.

b. the reticle jumps to the velocity vector and the system reverts
to AUTO.

c. abreak X appears through the reticle indicating an out of range
condition.

d. the reticle is displayed at the HUD limit and still displays the
predicted bomb impact point.

7. To properly track in CDIP (diving attack),

a. hold the velocity vector on the aim-off point until the pipper
reaches the target.

b. hold the velocity vector on the target until the pipper reaches
the target.

c. simply pull the pipper up to the target and hold it there for one
second prior to pickle.

d. put the DIL over the target and pickle anytime prior to the
pipper reaching the target.

AGD-5 E-2


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_71.jpeg:
To enter CDIP from a PACS AUTO program using HOTAS switches

a. push down on the FCP auto acq switch.

b. take command of the HUD and pull aft on the auto acq switch
in either cockpit.

c. take command of the HUD and pull aft on the auto acq switch
in the front cockpit.

d. pull aft on the auto acq switch in the front cockpit while pulling
up on the coolie switch.

E-3 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_72.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGD-5 E-4


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_73.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

A/A Air-to-air

A/D Air data

A/G Air-to-ground

ADC Air data computer

ADI Attitude director indicator

AFMSS Air Force Mission Support System
AGM Air-to-ground missile

AGR Air-to-ground ranging

AHRS Attitude heading reference system
ARMT Armament

ASL Azimuth steering line

AT Along track

AUTO Automatic

BDU Bomb dummy unit

C&D Controls and displays

CC Central computer

CDIP Continuously displayed impact point
CFT Conformal fuel tank

CMD Countermeasures dispenser; command
CRS Course; Component Repair Squadron
CT Cross track

F-1 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_74.jpeg:
D Dud cue

DIL Displayed impact line

DTM Data transfer module

EGI Embedded GPS/INS

ESL Elevation steering line

ETA Estimated time of arrival
ETE Estimated time en route

F Fragmentation pattern (frag) cue
FCP Front cockpit

FD Flight director

FNU Fighter navigation unit
GBU Guided bomb unit

HAG Height above ground

HAT Height above target

HDG Heading

HOTAS Hands on throttle and stick
HSI Horizontal situation indicator
HUD Head-up display

INS Inertial navigation system
IR Infrared

LADD Low altitude drogue delivery
LAS Laser

AGD-5 F-2


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_75.jpeg:
LC

LRDT

mil

MIL

MM

MN

MPCD

MPD

MPDP

MRA

MRI

NAV

hm

PACS

PB

PSL

RALT

RC

RCD

SYSB

SYSG

Left conformal fuel tank

Long rang dive toss

Minimum recovery altitude cue
Milliradian

Military (power)

Master mode

Mission navigator
Multipurpose color display
Multipurpose display
Multipurpose display processor
Minimum recovery altitude
Minimum release interval
Navigation

Nautical miles

Programmable armament control set

Push button

Pattern steering line
Radar altimeter

Right conformal fuel tank
Record

System (barometric)

System altitude derived by EGI

AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_76.jpeg:
TCFT

TD

TF

TGT

TIMPCT

TOF

TOT

TPULL

TREL

TRNG

TTGT

UFC

VTRS

WSO

AGD-5

Tangential conformal fuel tank
Target designator

Terrain following

Target

Time to impact

Time of flight; time of fall
Time on target

Time to pull

Time to release

Training

Time to target

Upfront control

Video tape recorder system

Weapon systems officer


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_77.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

F-5 AGD-5


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_78.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_8.jpeg:
A/G PACS Modes

The same ballistics equations are used regardless of release mode; the
presentation in the cockpit is what is different. Weapon release cockpit
displays are a function of the release mode choice. Delivery steering,
timing, and range cues may be optimized for weapon type, target type,
and designation characteristics.

If a loaded station is not selected on the PACS ARMT display, no steering
is available except NAV steering.

Regardless of the determined PACS mode, if a station with a guided
weapon loaded is selected, the CC is set to the GUIDED mode. For
conventional weapons, if the PACS mode is AUTO, the CC may be set to
AUTO or CDIP. The AUTO low altitude drogue delivery (LADD) option is
also available with a retarded nuclear weapon selected.

AUTO delivery symbology allows weapon delivery in a nonvisual
environment. The continuously displayed impact point (CDIP) mode
allows the pilot to deliver ordnance by visually positioning an aiming
index on the target.

An AUTO PACS program allows the flexibility of switching the display
between AUTO and CDIP via HOTAS. While in command of the HUD
with an AUTO PACS program, the pilot selects AUTO ACQ AFT to switch
to the CDIP aiming index. Subsequent aft selections toggle the display
symbology.

If CDIP is the PACS mode with no loaded stations selected, and AUTO
ACQ AFT is selected while in command of the HUD, the CC is set to CDIP
GUN.

AUTO

Auto Mode Description

The AUTO mode is the basic computed delivery mode of the F-15E. It

provides a means to deliver ordnance accurately with little or no visual
reference to the target.

AGD-5 D-2


Text from AGD-5_Computed_Bombing_Modes_page_9.jpeg:
At target designation, the CC determines the absolute position of the
target based on the aircraft actual position and target relative position
and begins to compute weapon impact position. The relative bomb impact
point is corrected for ballistics, wind, coriolis, and rack delays. Bomb
range is compared to the existing range to the target, and when the two
ranges are equal, weapons release occurs if the aircrew consents to it.

Equipment (86-0183 through 92-0366 before TCTO 1F-15E-737,
Embedded GPS/INS)

In order to effectively use the AUTO mode, the CC, MPDP, HUD,
MPD/MPCD, PACS, ADC, and FNU INS or AHRS must be functional.

Central Computer (CC)

The CC is the key element of the computed modes. It actually works the
bombing problem through the A/G module, and generates the release
signal. If the CC fails, computed deliveries are not available. Cockpit
indications are based on the selected delivery mode.

Multipurpose Display Processor (MPDP)

The MPDP creates all the symbology for display on the HUD and
MPD/MPCD.

Head-up Display (HUD)

The HUD presents the steering information and other delivery cues to the
pilot.

Multipurpose Display / Multipurpose Color Display (MPD /MPCD)

An MPD/MPCD provides access to program and monitor the PACS and
A/G delivery (DLVRY) program format. It may also be used to display an
HSI or ADI to obtain backup steering information.

Programmable Armament Control Set (PACS)
The PACS provides the CC an interface with the weapons. It is used to
help build the delivery program. An AUTO program includes station

selections, sequencing options (quantity/interval/bomb-on-target), and
fuzing/drag options.

D-3 AGD-5


