Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND WEAPONS
AGW-1
GENERAL PURPOSE BOMBS

DECEMBER 1998

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_10.jpeg:
Penetration Bombs

These bombs are designed to penetrate and explode inside a hard target
such as a concrete bunker. They are built with heavy cases and are
designed to counter break-up. The explosive charge is approximately
25 to 30% of the total weight. The BLU-109/B Penetrator bomb is an
example of a penetrating weapon.

Demolition Bombs

In demolition bombs, the explosive weight equals approximately 65 to 80%
of the total weight. These bombs have a relatively thin-walled casing to
maximize blast effect, while penetration and fragmentation effects are
limited. Demolition bombs are designed for a higher blast effect than a
GP bomb of comparable weight. The 3000 pound M118 and 15,000 pound
BLU-82 are examples of this type.

Fragmentation Bombs

As the name implies, these bombs are intended to disperse and project
high-velocity fragments. The fragments are the principal damage
mechanism of the weapons, with blast effects being a secondary
consideration. The charge to total weight ratio varies from 10 to 20%.
There are no bombs (unitary warheads) in the inventory designed
specifically for fragmentation, although GP bombs do produce a relatively
good fragmentation effect when used with a proximity fuze (air burst).
Cluster bomb unit (CBU) munitions are more commonly used as
fragmentation weapons.

Explosive Filler

The most common explosive filler is called Tritonal. It is a mix of TNT
and aluminum in a ratio of 80:20. H6 is also a commonly used explosive
filler. Both are less sensitive to electronic sparks than TNT or Tetryl
booster charges. The US Navy uses PBXN-109 onboard ships, since even
Tritonal and H6 are too sensitive to be used in the close confines of the
ship.

AGW-1 D-4


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_11.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Which weapon effect is maximized by a CBU munition?

a. Blast

b. Fragmentation
c. Cratering

d. Penetration

What fuze setting should be used with a GP bomb to maximize blast
effects?

a. Instantaneous

b. Delayed

c. Depth charge

d. GP bombs are not used for blast effect

A general purpose bomb is approximately ___ percent explosive by
weight.

a. 0-20

b. 25-30

c. 50

d. 65-80

Three effects of general purpose bombs are

a. incendiary, blast and coriolis.
b. blast, fragmentation and cratering.
c. armor penetration, incendiary and confusion.

For a general purpose bomb to produce a crater

some delay must be present in the fuze function.

an extender must be attached to the bomb.

a special bomb must be employed to penetrate the surface.
an instantaneous fuze function must be present.

pe op

D-5 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_12.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. b
2. a
3. Cc
4. b
5. a

AGW-1 D-6


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_13.jpeg:
WEAPON COMPONENTS

GP bombs are cylindrical in shape and are equipped with conical fins or
retarders for external high speed carriage. They are built for both nose
and tail fuzes to ensure reliability and to cause the desired bomb effects.
All GP bombs are similar in construction. The bomb body (Figure D-1)
contains the high explosive, charging well and suspension lugs. Other
parts added to make a complete munition are adapter boosters, fin
assembly, arming wires and fuzes.

BOMB BODY
NOSE FUZE PLUG [pe LUG SUSPENSION LUG

CHARGING WELL | TAIL FUZE

EXPLOSIVE CHARGE

NOSE FUZE WELL FORWARD CONDUIT TAIL FUZE PLUG

FUZE SEAT LINER

REAR CONDUIT
AGW-01-01

Figure D - 1. GP Bomb Body Components.

AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_14.jpeg:
The suspension lugs are screwed into the top of the bomb and are used for
carriage. Bombs weighing less than 2000 pounds are equipped with

14 inch suspension lugs. Bombs, like the MK 84, that are in the

2000 pounds class and above are equipped with 30 inch suspension lugs.

Adapter boosters are required when mechanical fuzes are used since the
mechanical fuze, by itself, is not powerful enough to detonate the main
charge of the bomb. The boosters are inside the bomb or fuze well and are
not visible. The explosive used in the booster charge is more sensitive
than the explosive filler it is used to detonate.

The fin assembly is attached to the bomb to stabilize it in flight and
ensure proper ballistic trajectory. Look for damage to the assembly
during preflight.

A charging well is connected to the nose and tail fuze wells and is located
just aft of the forward suspension lug. It is usually closed with a threaded
plug that must be removed for installation of an initiator and braided
steel arming cables or lanyards that are used with some fuzes. The steel
cables or lanyards are threaded through the conduits inside the bomb and
extend out of the top of the charging well for attachment to the
appropriate point for fuze arming.

AGW-1 D-8


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_15.jpeg:
External arming wires (Figure D-2) are installed on bomb type munitions
to allow the bomb to be released armed or safe. Arming wire routing
varies depending upon what type of munition is used.

For some GP bombs, one end of the nose fuze arm wire is secured to the
aft lug, and the tail fuze arm wire is attached to the front lug. These
wires are then inserted through an arming swivel loop and then through
the opposite suspension lug. This system allows the arming wires to
remain with the bomb and not damage the aircraft following release.

TYPICAL NOSE AND TAIL
ARMING WIRE ROUTING PRK
ARMING SOLENOID

FORWARD SUSPENSION LUG
SWIVEL & LINK

/ TAIL ARMING WIRE

AGW-01-02

Figure D - 2. Arming Wires.

Always use the dash 34 checklist to preflight munitions loaded on the
aircraft. Arming wire configurations vary with the intended mission and
may be different than those encountered during normal training or
exercises (see section G-1).

AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_16.jpeg:
As an example, once mechanical fuzes are uploaded, the free ends of the
wires are inserted through the safety devices in the M904 nose fuze and/or
the ATU-35 for the tail fuze (Figure D-3). The ATU-35 is the spin drive
assembly that arms the M905 tail fuze inside the bomb.

ARMING WIRE
UPPER
RETAINING
EYELETS

FZU-18/B

ADAPTER
BOOSTER

SAFETY DEVICE
ARMING VANE

M904 NOSE FUZE ATU-35 FUZE DRIVE ASSEMBLY

AGW-01-03

Figure D - 3. Arming Wire to Fuze.

The arming wire swivel loops are inserted into the proper arming
solenoids for cockpit selectable arming. When the weapon separates from
the aircraft, the selected solenoids (nose or tail, or nose and tail) hold the

swivel loops, pulling the arming wire(s) from the fuze(s), thus allowing
them to spin arm.

AGW-1 D-10


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_17.jpeg:
SPECIFIC WEAPONS

Weapons presented in this course are a small selection of those unitary
warhead bombs the F-15E may carry. For more detailed information,
refer to TO 1F-15E-34-1-1, TO 1-1M-34, or TO 1F-15E-1.

Bomb Nomenclature

Munitions coding is a compilation of designations that serve to identify
type of weapon or suspension apparatus and its intended function (Figure
D-4). The munitions model is based on design source and numbered series
on general purpose weapons and some cluster weapons. Munitions make

use of the following designation symbols.
CB U -87 A/B

ITEM IDENTIFICATION (CLUSTER BOMB) 4d |
"U" FOR UNIT

SERIAL NUMBER (87TH CLUSTER BOMB)
MODEL (1ST VERSION OF CBU-87)
INSTALLATION (AIRCRAFT INSTALLED, EXPENDED)

AGW-01-04

Identification Designator

AD Certain adapting items LK Ammunition links

AG _Ajr to ground LM Ground-based launchers

BB Explosive items LU Illuminating units

BD Simulated bombs MA _ Miscellaneous armament items
BL Bombs and mines MD_ Miscellaneous simulated munitions
BR Bomb racks and shackles MH _ Munitions handling equipment
BS Stabilizing & retarding device MJ Munitions countermeasures
CB Cluster bomb ML Miscellaneous munitions

CC Actuator cartridges MT Mounts

CD Clustered munitions, not end item PA External munitions dispensing device
CN Miscellaneous containers PD Leaflet dispenser

DS Target directing device PG Ammunition

FM  Fuzes PW _ Internal dispenser

FS = Fuze safety-arming device RD Dummy rockets

FZ Fuze-related item RL Rockets

GA Aircraft gun SA = _Gun/bomb/rocket sights

GB = Guided bombs SU ___ Stores suspension and release
GF Gun related items (dispenser containers)

GP Pod guns TM = Miscellaneous tanks

GU_ Miscellaneous guns TT Test items

KA Munitions clustering hardware WD Warheads

KM Kits WT _ Training warheads

LA Aircraft installed launchers M Army designation for munitions

MK Navy designation for bombs
Installation Designator

A Aircraft installed, Fixed E Ground item, Moveable, not a Vehicle
B Aircraft installed, Expendable (Box for Munitions)

Figure D - 4. Munitions Designations.

D-11 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_18.jpeg:
General Purpose Bombs

MK 82 LDGP Bomb

The MK 82 low drag general purpose (LDGP) bomb (Figure D-5) has a
slender metal body designed to produce minimum drag. The bomb weighs
531 pounds with 192 pounds of explosive. The bomb produces blast,
fragmentation and cratering. Its main function is determined by the
fuze(s) and fuze components with which it was armed. The MK 82 bomb
is used with proximity, mechanical, or electrical fuzes; however, the
mechanical fuze is most common. The bomb may use a nose or tail fuze or
both to increase the functional reliability. If the bomb is tail fuzed only, a
nose fuze plug must be inserted in the nose cavity to prevent collapse upon
high speed impact with a hard surface. This aids penetration of hard
targets and increases the cratering effect. The MK 82 LDGP uses the
conical fins consisting of an elongated fin cone and four streamlined blades
assembled perpendicular to the cone. The fin cone accepts the ATU-35 tail
fuze drive assembly for a mechanical tail fuze.

MB MK-82 MODI
sS INERT FILLED
AVG WT 496

Figure D - 5. MK 82 LDGP.

388
shoe
8B

i

AGW-01-05

AGW-1 D-12


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_19.jpeg:
MK 82 Air Inflatable Retarder (AIR) HDGP Bomb

The MK 82 AIR is a MK 82 bomb with a BSU-49/B AIR tail assembly
installed (Figure D-6). The AIR provides a high-speed (200-700 KCAS)
low altitude delivery capability by use of bomb retardation. This increases
bomb trail and reduces the danger of the aircraft being hit by fragments.
The probability of bomb ricochet is reduced by increased impact angles
while increasing bomb effectiveness against frag/blast sensitive targets.

LOW-DRAG CONFIGURATION

AGW-01-06

Figure D - 6. MK 82 AIR.

The BSU-49 AIR tail assembly consists of a low drag (LD) stabilizer
canister unit, a ballute (balloon/parachute) retarder, and retarder release
lanyard assembly. The stabilizer canister acts as a container for the
ballute and provides aerodynamic stability during carriage and low drag
delivery. The lanyard assembly is used to initiate the release of the base
plate and subsequent ballute deployment for a high drag (HD) release.
Airloads open the baseplate withdrawing the ballute until airflow through
the inlets inflate it.

The MK 82 AIR can be released in either the HD configuration (ballute
deploys after release) or in the LD configuration (ballute remains stowed).

D-18 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGW-2, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Change # Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_20.jpeg:
The release configuration is determined by arming wire/lanyard routing
and may be cockpit selectable.

MK 84 LDGP

The MK 84 LD bomb is a GP bomb that weighs 1972 pounds with

945 pounds of explosive. Its fuzing and functioning are the same as the
MK 82, but it has better penetration and cratering effects because of its
size. The conical fin assembly is much like that of the MK 82 LDGP.

MK 84 AIR HDGP Bomb

The MK 84 AIR HDGP bomb is a MK 84 GP bomb that is modified by
attaching a BSU-50/B AIR tail assembly. The BSU-50/B components and
assembly are similar to the BSU-49/B AIR. The operation of the two
munitions is identical. The BSU-50/B AIR assembly provides the
capability to deliver the MK 84 at airspeeds not exceeding 700 KCAS.
Again, check the external stores limitations in chapter 5 of the Dash 1 to
verify aircraft limitations that may be more restrictive.

The BSU-50/B retarder is only 12% larger than the BSU-49/B, but the
MK 84 is four times heavier than the MK 82. This increase in weapon
mass, coupled with a small increase in ballute size, forces a higher
delivery airspeed for proper G forces to be sensed by the fuze.

If the BSU-50/B is used with a live unit FMU retard sensing fuze,
deceleration forces required to initiate fuze arming determine minimum
release airspeeds. Minimum release airspeeds for HD employment are
fuze dependent:

e FMU-54/B - 550 KCAS
e FMU-54A/B~ - 550 KCAS
e FMU-139A/B - 450 KCAS

These delivery airspeeds are critical to ensure fuze function criteria is met
and fuzes arm when required.

AGW-1 D-14


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_21.jpeg:
BLU-109/B Penetrator Bomb

This bomb, also referred to as an I-2000, is in the 2000-pound class and
has enhanced penetration capability against hard targets (Figure D-7).
Improvements include: no nose fuze well, increased bomb wall strength,
and a stronger tail fuze assembly. It contains 550 pounds of explosive and
uses an FMU-143/B internal tail fuze. The FZU-32B/B initiator is
installed in the charging well of the bomb and provides electrical power by
an air scoop turbine generator to arm the fuze at release. The bomb aft
section is compatible with MK 84 tail assemblies, but the BLU-109 is most
commonly used in the GBU-15, the GBU-24A/B low-level laser guided
bomb (LLLGB) or the AGM-130C missile.

30" SUSPENSION LUG 30" SUSPENSION LUG

1 IN. CHARGING FUZE
WELL WELL

AGW-01-07

Figure D - 7. BLU-109/B.
NOTE

Impact angle and velocity are critical for proper weapon affects.

Demolition and Fragmentation Bombs

Demolition and fragmentation bombs are beyond the scope of this lesson.

D-15 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_22.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Suspension lugs for a 500 lb GP bomb are spaced ____ inches apart.

a. 10
b. 14
, 30
d. 16

2. AMK 82 (AIR) usesa___ tail assembly.

a. conical

b. BSU-50/B
c. BSU-49/B
3. The BLU-109/B bomb is equipped with fuzes.
a. nose
b. tail

c. nose and tail

AGW-1 D-16


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_23.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D-17 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_24.jpeg:
FUZES

No weapon is of much value unless there is some way of controlling it.
There must be some manner to store, load and carry munitions in a safe
condition yet have them detonate at the desired time. A fuze is used to
accomplish these tasks. Therefore, there are normally two settings
associated with each fuze.

Fuze Arm Time

Fuze arm time is the time it takes for the fuze to reach an armed condition
after release. It provides safe clearance to the crew and aircraft by
preventing a premature detonation. The distance the weapon is from the
aircraft at fuze arm time is safe separation.

Function Setting

The function setting controls what conditions must be met for a munition
to function as it is supposed to. It may be set for an air burst, or after the
weapon has hit or penetrated a target. This will vary depending on the
desired weapon effect.

Methods of Arming

Vane

The arming vane is a small propeller that is rotated by airflow after
weapon release as the munition falls. When the vane has rotated the
required number of times, the fuze is armed. Special gears compensate for
variations in release airspeeds.

Pin

The arming pin is ejected or withdrawn by spring action when the weapon
is released. The ejection of the pin releases the arming mechanism and
allows the fuze to arm.

Inertia

The inertia fuze is armed by an abrupt change in the velocity or
deceleration of the weapon by deploying fins or ballutes.

AGW-1 D-18


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_25.jpeg:
Electric

An electrical-arming fuze may be armed by a thermal battery, an air
turbine alternator, or an air scoop generator that is activated at bomb
release by the extraction of a lanyard.

Methods of Functioning

A fuze functions by one of the following methods:

Impact

Impact fuzes are initiated when they strike a sufficiently dense material.
These fuzes may function instantaneously or after a delay set for
microseconds or even days.

Proximity

The proximity fuze is a miniature doppler radar altimeter. The fuze
transmits radar waves that are reflected back to the fuze by the target.
When the lag time between transmission and reception reaches a set
value, the fuze functions. This lag time has been precomputed and
translated into selectable burst height values in altitude above the target.
Burst height values vary among different fuzes.

Time
In a time fuze, the delay is initiated at bomb release and not at the

instant of impact. The time element is obtained by a mechanical or
electrical device.

Hydrostatic

Hydrostatic fuzes are employed in depth bombs for underwater demolition
work. They are not addressed in this lesson.

Classification

Fuzes for conventional weapons are classified by their location in the
munition. Fuzes are located in the nose and/or tail of the weapon. The
distinction between these locations (Figure D-8) is important because of
the differences in sensitivity to impact and because of the directional effect
on fragmentation.

D-19 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_26.jpeg:
Nose

The nose fuze is frequently a fuze that functions on impact. A properly
adjusted fuze can be sensitive enough to be initiated by impact with the
softest of material. A nose fuze tends to deflect sidewall fragments away
from the nose of the bomb. If your target is troops in the open, you want
maximum frag effect, produced by bombs with nose or proximity fuzes.
This results in more fragmentation deflection above ground level where
your target is located. Nose fuzes are also used to open CBU canisters or
to create an air burst affect.

AGW-01-08

Figure D - 8. Fuze Classification.
Tail

Tail fuzes can have more than one function (Figure D-8). They can
function on their own or provide a redundancy to the nose fuze to increase
overall munition reliability. The tail fuze is normally set to detonate a
short time after initial impact. When used alone, this allows the bomb to
penetrate the target prior to detonation. To aid this penetration, the tail
fuze tends to deflect the fragmentation away from the tail of the bomb.
The tail fuze is used against harder targets or when cratering is the
desired effect.

AGW-1 D - 20


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_27.jpeg:
Specific Fuzes

M904 Nose Fuze

The M904 is a mechanical impact nose fuze (Figure D-9) used in

GP bombs. The fuze uses an arming vane to arm. Arming begins when
the arming wire is withdrawn from the vane, allowing it to spin in the
airstream. For airspeeds from 150 to 600 knots, the arming time is
independent of airspeed. This is accomplished by use of a mechanical
governor and a constant speed arming gear train.

ARMING WIRE
UPPER
RETAINING

EYELETS

M904E3

SAFE ARMED

FZU-18/B

WARNING
WINDOWS

ARMING TIME STOP
SET-SCREW

ADAPTER BOOSTER

SAFETY DEVICE
ARMING VANE

AGW-01-09

Figure D - 9. M904 Nose Fuze.

Arming delay times are set on a calibrated dial on the front of the fuze.
To set a delay time of less than 6 seconds, the stop set screw must be
removed. The selectable arming delay times for the M904E1 fuze are: 4,
6, 8, 12 or 20 seconds. Times have a tolerance of +20%. For the M904E2
or E3, delay times range from 2 to 18 seconds in 2 second increments with
a tolerance of +10%.

The positive tolerance must be used to determine the minimum release
altitude to ensure fuze arming prior to impact. For example, for an
M904E2 fuze, if an arming time of 4 seconds is set, the longest it may take
the fuze to arm is 4.4 seconds (4.0 +.4). The time of flight for this weapon
should be at least this value or the fuze may dud. The shortest time it

D-21 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_28.jpeg:
may take to arm is 3.6 seconds; this time must be considered for safe
escape should the bomb detonate at the end of arming time.

Function delay times are achieved by inserting a delay element behind the
firing pin. This is accomplished by munitions personnel. The delay times
are: instantaneous, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.10 or 0.25 seconds. If you note any
red in the warning window during preflight do not touch the fuze, contact
the munition specialist.

M905 Tail Fuze

The M905 tail fuze is a mechanical impact tail fuze commonly used with
GP bombs. Fuze arming begins when the arming wire is withdrawn from
the vane tab of the ATU-35 fuze drive assembly (Figure D-10). This
assembly provides the rotational force required to arm the tail fuze just as
the vane spin arms the M904 nose fuze.

VANE RESTRAINING PIN

al

ARMING WIRE SAFETY PIN

AGW-01-10

Figure D - 10. ATU Fuze Drive Assembly.

AGW-1 D - 22


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_29.jpeg:
The arming time delays for the M905 fuze are: 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 20
seconds with a tolerance of 20% (Figure D-11). The function delay
elements are: instantaneous, 0.01, 0.025, 0.50, 0.10 and 0.25 seconds. All
fuze settings will be set by a munitions specialist since the fuze is inside
the tail assembly, and will be annotated in the aircraft forms or chalked
on the side of the bomb for aircrew information.

AGW-01-11

Figure D - 11. M905 Fuze.

AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND WEAPONS

COVER

GENERAL PURPOSE BOMBS
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide for studying the nomenclature, components
and characteristics of conventional weapons used by the F-15E.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeecceeeseecesscecesneeessaeecesaeecnsaeeeessaeeessaeeeesaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.0... eeeeeeeeees C-1
TEXT cece cc ceesneeccessseeeceesseeeecesssaeeeseeesaeeecesssseeeseeesaaeeeseesaeeeeeee D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo... eeccceeseecesceceseeeessaeesesaeeeeesaeeseseeeenaees E-1
GLOSSARY. eee ceeseeessneeeesneeecesaceeesaeeensaeecesaeeessaeecesaeesesaeeseeaeeees F-1
HANDOUT, ccs sass suse sues sens sens sens sss sues sun stirs see outs ones sine suns suns autre sins aes sews ses sun a G-1

A-1 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_30.jpeg:
FMU-54 Tail Fuze

The FMU-54 is a mechanically operated, retardation sensing tail fuze. It
has two versions, the FMU-54/B (Figure D-12) and the FMU-54A/B
(Figure D-13). They can be used with the MK 82 AIR and the MK 84 AIR.
As the fuze is not visible after installation in the bomb, all settings must
be made before installation.

FMU-54/B:

When the bomb is released, the fuze arming lanyard is
pulled, initiating the arming time delay (selectable from
0.75 to 3.50 seconds in 0.25 increments). The fuze must
sense a force of 3.5 +0.5 G for 0.6 seconds in order to
function. This is provided by the bomb's retardation device
functioning. If retardation is lost during the 0.6 seconds
(retardation device failure), the fuze should not arm. Note:
BSU-49 failure, however, can result in an armed munition.
To achieve the required G force for arming, minimum
delivery airspeed must be greater than 330 KCAS for the
MK 82 ATR and 550 KCAS for the MK 84 AIR. The fuze
functions at impact.

FUZE LANYARD

ASSEMBLY

AGW-1

ARMING TIME

WO

ARMING INDICATOR
(RED-ARMED/GREEN-SAFE)

to. _f A

AGW-01-12

Figure D - 12. FMU-54/B.


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_31.jpeg:
FMU-54A/B: This modified version operates the same as the FMU-54/B,
except that the arming times are selectable from 2.5 to 6.0
seconds.

FMU-54A/B TAIL FUZE

AGW-01-13

Figure D - 13. FMU-54A/B.

D-25 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_32.jpeg:
FMU-113/B Proximity Nose Fuze

The FMU-113/B nose fuze (Figure D-14) is a low-altitude, radar proximity
fuze used in GP bombs. It is 13.75 inches long, 5.6 inches in diameter,
and weighs 8 pounds. An FZU-2/B booster is required to be installed on
the fuze prior to installation in the bomb. The fuze has a safe/arm
indicator that can be viewed after installation in the bomb. The fuze is
mechanically armed and has ground-selectable arming time settings of 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 18 seconds, as well as a SAFE position. Initiation of the
fuze is accomplished by a bungee lanyard pulled at release. This action
allows the nose plug to retract, allowing air to reach the turbine. The fuze
has no stored arming energy; power for sensor operation is obtained from
an internal air-turbine-powered alternator. The sensor portion of the fuze
is designed to provide a 0 to 25-foot (15-foot nominal) HOB. The fuze has
an impact burst backup feature.

BUNGEE
LANYARD

FUZE ARM
TIME WINDOW

ARM INDICATOR PASE

ARMED Y
GREEN | AIR 4 SA
TURBINE L \\
NOSE \S
PLUG Ss
a,
\ d <i FUZE ARM
RED \ 5 TIME SELECT
NN RING

ARM INDICATOR SWIVEL
SAFING PIN WINDOW AND LINK
AND FLAG

AGW-01-14

Figure D - 14. FMU-113/B.

AGW-1 D - 26


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_33.jpeg:
The flight profile is as shown in Figure D-15.

RELEASE
(NO ARMING ENERGY AVAILABLE)

MUNITION VELOCITY MUST EXCEED
250 KNOTS TO OPERATE

TURBINE AND COUNTER IN

<—_——— ARMING ENERGY AVAILABLE
AT COUNTER EXPIRATION

REVOLUTION
COUNTER TIME
(TURBINE DRIVEN)

SAFE AND ARM ROTOR ROTATED IN LINE
— 200 TO 500 ms DELAY
ARMED — LOOKING FOR HOB
ARM TIME Beer | ok
(MECHANICAL CLOCK)

ALTITUDE

TURBINE IS UNLOCKED AND ARM TIME CLOCK aN
IS WOUND AND STARTED WHEN LANYARD IS

op
PULLED AT MUNITION SEPARATION FROM SpeatS
AIRCRAFT KS

GROUND
AGW-01-15

Figure D - 15. FMU-113/B Flight Delivery.

D-27 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_34.jpeg:
FMU-143/B Fuze

This impact tail fuze is used with the BLU-109/B warhead in GBU-10 and
GBU-24A/B laser guided bombs and the AGM-130C missile (Figure D-16).
It has a nonselectable impact delay of 60 milliseconds and two selectable
arming time delays of 5.5 and 12.0 seconds. Arming delay is initiated by
the arming lanyard at bomb release to activate the FZU-32A/B initiator,
which also provides safe escape. A FZU-32B/B uses an air scoop turbine
electrical generator to arm the fuze.

The 60 millisecond delay is activated upon impact allowing for target

penetration before bomb detonation. An impact force of at least 160 G for
6.5 milliseconds is required for detonation.

FMU-143B(D-2)/B

BOMB FUZE

AGW-01-16

Figure D - 16. FMU-143B/B Fuze.

AGW-1 D - 28


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_35.jpeg:
FMU-139A/B Fuze

This impact fuze is designed to be used with the MK 80 series GP bombs.
Either low drag or high drag functioning is automatically determined by
bomb characteristics. The fuze can be installed in both the nose and tail
fuze wells and is electrically initiated at bomb release by an air scoop
generator (FZU-48/B) in the charging well. For the HD option, the fuze
must be in the tail well. Arming time tolerance is +5% of the faceplate
setting. After arming, an additional .08 seconds must elapse before
impact (for complete safe/arm rotor rotation) or the fuze will not function.
If the fuze senses retardation (high drag option), it uses the preselected
HIGH DRAG ARM/DELAY function (Figure D-17). This is set on the
ground by rotating the appropriate knob on the fuze faceplate. As a safety
feature, a lock-out button must be depressed to select the 2.0 arming time.
Low drag settings are set similarly and are used if no retardation is
sensed after bomb release. Low drag arm time options are 4, 6, 7, 10, 14
and 20 seconds. High drag arm time options are 2, 2.6, 4 and 5 seconds.
Function time delay is selected with the high drag setting, even if
dropping the weapon in the low drag mode. Available options are
instantaneous, .01, .025 and .06 seconds. The fuze contains several safety
devices that should preclude functioning if required parameters are not
met. If at any time a red and black rod is seen protruding from the center
of the fuze faceplate, it should be considered armed.

LOW DRAG

ARM, TIME HIGH DRAG
@) ARM/DELAY

2) Zas— 2.6160

4.0/25 —4 y, F-2.6/25
4.0/INST *» ¢“2.6/10
5.0/INST 2.6/INST

AGW-01-17

Figure D- 17. FMU-139A/B.

D - 29 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_36.jpeg:
Programmable Armament Control System (PACS)

Refer to AGD-02 CBT and workbook for complete discussion of the PACS
and jettison options.

WEAPON/FUZE COMBINATIONS

The many different munitions the F-15E can carry accommodate a variety
of fuzes that can have numerous settings. Each combination of weapon,
fuze, and setting will produce a predictable effect on a given target. An
example can be shown with the GP bomb. When fitted with an
instantaneous nose fuze, frag and blast are maximized. When a GP bomb
has a delayed tail fuze, cratering is the result. This predictability is used
when choosing weapons to employ against different targets.

Targeting

Targeting, for the purpose of this discussion, is the matching of munitions
with the desired effect on a target. Targeting is normally accomplished at
higher headquarters by the people who have “the big picture.” They use
the Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manuals (JMEM), which is now on
computer, as their “Bible” for weapon selection. The JMEM are the
authoritative source of information needed to select weapons and estimate
the force requirements to achieve the desired results.

Munitions Selection

The following are examples of munitions matched to targets to maximize
target destruction.

AGW-1 D - 30


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_37.jpeg:
General Purpose (GP) Bomb/Fuze Combinations

Category
(Bomb/Fuze)

GP
Proximity

GP

Instant

GP
Penetration
Short Delay (.01)

GP
Penetration
Medium Delay (.25)

Fuze

FMU-113/B

Bomb

MK 82
MK 84

MK 82
MK 84
w/Nose Plug

MK 82
MK 84
w/Nose Plug

BLU109

Effect

Max Blast
Max Frag

Good blast
Good frag

Incendiary

Cratering
Blast

Armor
Penetration

Max cratering

Target

Personnel in open

Personnel in light
armor trucks, SAMS

Surface supplies
Fuel
Ammunition

Unimproved roads
Light buildings
Armor

Harder targets
Concrete roads
Underground fuel
Large buildings

Runways

Bunkers/Bridges

Table D - 1. GP Bomb/Fuze Combinations.

D-31

AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_38.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The M904 is a(n) fuze.
a. impact
b. proximity
Cc. tail
d. air burst

2. The ATU-35 drive assembly is used in conjunction with the

fuze.
a. MK 339
b. M904
c. FMU-56
d. M905

AGW-1 D - 32


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_39.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 33 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the characteristics of general classes of conventional
weapons.

2. Identify the general purpose bombs carried on the F-15E by type
and/or function.

3. Identify the characteristics of different types of fuzes used with
general purpose bombs.

4. Identify the effects of various fuze/general purpose bomb
combinations.

AGW-1 B-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_40.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-1 D - 34


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_41.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

About how much of a general purpose bomb is explosive?

a. 20%

b. 50%

c. 80%

d. 100%

The blast effect is maximized in a bomb.
a GP

b. demolition

e fragmentation

d. penetration

What fuze setting ensures weapons safe separation from the aircraft?

Burst height

Fuze function setting
Safe escape altitude
Fuze arm time

ao op

Which weapon maximizes frag damage?

MK 82 with an instantaneous fuze setting
MK 82 with an FMU 1138 fuze

MK 82 with a .010 delay

MK 82 with a .25 delay

ao op

E-1 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_42.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-1 E-2


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_43.jpeg:
APC
ATU
BLU
BSU
CBU
FMU
FZU
GBU
GP
HD
HDGP
HOB
JMEM
LD
LDGP
LGB

LLLGB

MK
N/T

SUU

GLOSSARY

Armored personnel carrier
Anemometer (Vane type unit)
Bomb live unit

Bomb stabilizer unit
Cluster bomb unit

Fuze munitions unit

Fuze unit

Guided bomb unit

General purpose

High drag

High drag general purpose

Height of burst

Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual

Low drag

Low drag general purpose
Laser guided bomb
Low-level laser guided bomb
Air Force design (M-117)
Navy Design (MK-82)
Nose/Tail

Stores suspension and release unit

AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_44.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-1 F-2


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_45.jpeg:
HANDOUT

MK 82 AIR (BSU-49 FIN)

HIGH/LOW DRAG, NOSE FUZING

TO NOSE
ARMING UNIT AIR LANYARD

TO TAIL ARMING UNIT

FIXED HIGH DRAG, NOSE FUZING TES NONE
—)
ly
ARMING TO TAIL LANYARD STOWAGE
WIRE ARMING UNIT CHANNEL

AGW-01-18

G-1 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_46.jpeg:
MK 84 AIR (BSU-50 FIN)

FIXED LOW DRAG, NOSE/TAIL FUZING

CHARGING WELL ATU-35
— )
AIR
TO NOSE
ARMING UNIT ARMING UNIT RANIASD
STOWED

a

HIGH/LOW DRAG, NOSE/TAIL FUZING (OPTION 2)

FZU-48
ARMING TO CENTER TO TAIL LANYARD
WIRE ARMING UNIT ARMING UNIT STOWAGE

CHANNEL

FMU-139A/B A

AGW-01-19

AGW-1 G-2


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_47.jpeg:
GP BOMB FUZES AND COMPONENTS

NOSE FUZES

4 FMU-113
@)

SUSPENSION LUGS

CHARGING WELL

AGW-01-20

Arming wire - Through vane/striker rod
Retaining clip - Installed

Arm indicators - Green, no red visible

Fuze - Clean, undamaged, settings checked

= fo Bor

G-3 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_48.jpeg:
GP BOMB FUZES AND COMPONENTS

TAIL FUZES

ATU-35 DRIVE
(USED WITH M905 FUZE)

FMU-54A/B AGW-01-21

Arming wire - Installed

ATU-35 drive safety cotter pin - Removed
Retaining clip - Installed

Red bands on cord assemblies - Not visible
Fuze - Clean, undamaged, settings checked

AGW-1 G-4


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_49.jpeg:
GP BOMB FUZES AND COMPONENTS

NOSE OR TAIL FUZES

FZU-48
(USED WITH FMU-139 FUZE)

FUZE WELL ARMING WIRE

AGW-01-22

1. Lanyard lock - Secures lanyard
2. Fuze well arming wire - Installed
3.  Fuzes/initiators - Clean, undamaged, settings checked

G-5 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS
1. Read TO 1F-15E-1, Section V, External Stores
2. Read TO 1-1M-34, applicable portions

3. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

C-1 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_50.jpeg:
MK 82/MK 84 LDGP

@) RETAINING CLIP

STOP SCEW

INSPECTION
WINDOW

SWIVEL AND LINK

AFT SUSPENSION LUG

TAIL ARMING WIRE (4)

FORWARD SUSPENSION LUG AGW-01-23

~

Bomb - Secure

2. Nose arming wire - Attached to aft bomb lub, through front lug, swivel
and link attached to fwd arming unit, then to nose fuze with 1.5 to 2.0
inch excess

Nose fuze safety pin - Removed

Tail fuze arming wire - Attached to fwd bomb lug, through aft lug,
swivel and link attached to aft arming unit, then to ATU-35 drive with
1.5 to 2.0 inch excess, retaining clip installed

ATU-35 drive safety cotter pin - Removed

Fuze settings - Match mission requirements

Fuze access cover - Installed

All access doors, panels, and fairings - Secure

= oO

COM DOH

AGW-1 G-6


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_51.jpeg:
GP BOMB TAIL FINS

BSU-49 FIN
REMAINS INSTALLED FOR LOW DRAG GP BOMB TAIL FINS
DELIVERY AND IS DISCONNECTED FOR
HIGH DRAG DELIVERY Ww

BSU-50 FIN AGW-01-24

1. Fin body - Clean, undamaged
2. Fuze access cover - Installed

BSU-49/50 Only

3. Safety latch pin - Installed

4. Lanyard clip - Installed

5. Release latch safing pins - Removed

6. (Fixed low drag) AIR lanyard swivel loops - Stowed on spring clip

G-7 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-1 C-2


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
WEAPON CHARACTERISTICS

There are various ways munitions accomplish their purpose. The type of
target you are assigned dictates which weapon and fuze are to be used for
the desired effect. Although this decision is normally made at higher
levels, you should be aware of how munitions accomplish their
purpose-destroying the target.

Bomb Effects

The destructive effect of a bomb, regardless of its size, is due to the
detonation of the high-explosive filler. The chemical reaction (explosion) is
used to achieve one of five basic effects in the target area: blast,
fragmentation, cratering, armor penetration or incendiary.

Blast

The blast effect is caused by the tremendous overpressures generated by
high explosive detonation. Complete detonation of high explosives can
generate pressures up to 700 tons per square inch and temperatures in
the range of 3000 to 4500°C prior to bomb case fragmentation.
Approximately half of the total energy generated is used in swelling the
bomb casing to 1.5 times its normal size prior to fragmenting and then
imparting velocity to those fragments. The remainder of this energy is
expended in compression of the air surrounding the bomb and is
responsible for the blast effect. This effect is most desirable for attacking
industrial complexes or habitable structures with the intention of blowing
down walls, collapsing roofs, destroying or damaging machinery, etc.
Blast is confined to relatively short distances in its effectiveness on
personnel. The maximum distance at which the blast from a 2000 pound
general purpose (GP) bomb is considered effective against personnel is 110
feet. Blast effect of a GP bomb is maximized by using a fuzing system
that produces an air or surface burst with little or no confinement of the
overpressures. The explosive train is directed away from the point of
impact using nose fuzing to ensure maximum blast effect.

D-1 AGW-1


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_8.jpeg:
Fragmentation

The size of bomb fragments depends on the thickness of the case, the case
material, the explosive, and the ratio of explosive weight to case weight.
In weapons where fragment size is not predetermined, such as GP bombs,
the fragments vary widely in size and weight. In weapons where
fragmentation is the desired effect, casings are designed to produce a
uniform fragment size calculated to optimize the effectiveness of the
weapon against particular types of targets. Fragments of a bomb case can
achieve velocities from 3000 to 11,000 fps depending on the type of bomb,
(for example, GP bomb fragments have velocities of 5000 to 9000 fps).
Fragmentation is effective against troops, vehicles, aircraft and other soft
targets. The fragmentation generated from the detonation of a
high-explosive bomb has greater effective range than blast, usually up to
approximately 3000 feet regardless of bomb size. The fragmentation effect
can be maximized by using a bomb specifically designed for this effect, or
by using a GP bomb with an air burst functioning fuze.

Cratering

With conventional aircraft-delivered bombs, the cratering effect is
normally achieved by using a GP bomb with a delayed fuzing system.
This system allows bomb penetration before the explosion occurs and
permits the formation of a larger crater as a result. This effect is most
desirable in interdiction of supply routes and area denial operation. It
also has application in attacks on multiple-storied buildings. Rather than
detonating the bomb instantaneously on impact with the roof of a
building, the delayed fuzing allows the bomb to penetrate and use the
confinement of the building walls to increase the destructive effect. The
kill mechanism is usually blast or fragmentation. The explosive train is
directed towards the point of impact using tail fuzing for cratering and
penetration.

Armor Penetration

Armor penetration is an effective damage mechanism against tanks,
assault guns, armored personnel carriers (APCs), and other armored
targets. Whether accomplished by high kinetic energy penetrators or by
shaped charges, penetration is accompanied by damage within the target
by blast fragmentation or incendiary effects. A major problem associated
with penetration weapons is the lack of damage visible to the follow-on
attacker. This may result in repeated attacks to produce battlefield
evidence that a target is no longer a threat.

AGW-1 D-2


Text from AGW-1_General_Purpose_Bombs_page_9.jpeg:
Incendiary

Fire is effective in interrupting operations of enemy personnel and in
damaging supplies stored in the open. Although a relatively small
firebomb can provide a spectacular display, it often does less damage than
indicated.

Conventional incendiaries, which started great fires during World War II,
had little penetrating capability. Munitions have now been developed
with full fragmentation and penetrating capabilities coupled with reactive
incendiary devices. These improved incendiaries are highly effective
against fuel and other flammable targets.

Bomb Types
Bombs are generally categorized according to the ratio of explosive weight
to total weight. Categories include GP, penetration, demolition and

fragmentation.

General Purpose Bombs

GP bombs can be used against a variety of targets. Since the body case is
approximately 2 inch thick, the casing creates a fragmentation effect at
the moment of detonation. Also, since the explosive filler constitutes
approximately 50% of the total weight, considerable damage from the
blast effect can be gained through the use of proximity fuzes. A general
purpose bomb can be used for cratering by installing a steel nose closure
plug and using a tail fuze. This configuration penetrates medium hard
targets. The bomb was given the designation GP because of its versatility.
These bombs normally weigh between 250 and 2000 pounds and produce
relatively good blast and fragmentation. Examples of this type are the
500 pound MK 82 and 2000 pound MK 84 series bombs.

D-3 AGW-1


