Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

TACTICS
TAC-5
MISSION PLANNING

FEBRUARY 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_10.jpeg:
TARGET AREA PLANNING

Since the target is the focal point of the mission, working from the target
backward is the normal planning priority. Once a target is determined,
the following information needs to be collected.

Target Study Materials

A unit intelligence target specialist should be relied upon to get you the
best available information about your target. Figure D-1, for example,
shows an aim point graphic that contains WGS-84 coordinates (i.e., what
your INS uses), an overhead photo, a 1/250,000 and 1/50,000 scale map of
the aim point and its elevation.

Although HHQ (higher headquarters) and local planning staffs should
crosscheck the Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual (JMEM) for target
and ordnance compatibility, do a simple logic test yourself. Going to the
target with the best available ordnance load the first time may reduce the
need to return a second time.

Target orientation is also important in some cases. Your ordnance may
dictate running down a runway rather than across it, for example. The
time of day, visual ID requirements, and surrounding terrain all play
some part in determining your attack profile.

Time of day and attack axis can significantly alter the IR characteristics

of the target area. This must be considered when planning attacks that
require an IR sensor for delivery or guidance.

TAC-5 D-4


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_11.jpeg:
AIM POINT GRAPHIC UNCLASSIFIED | WGS GEODETICS

37-19.832N
WAS et 116-47.035W

363-19-07 ; ELEV FT (MSL) 05540

POINT DESCRIPTION DSC
NE CORNER OF BUILDINGS

(BDD)
REF CHART/ SCALE VER ACC
$/200 ATC FT 90%

1:200,000 VER ACC
FT 90% MSL

PHOTO DATE APG PUB DATE
JUL 93 20 JAN 94

UNCLASSIFIED

SAC FORM 444 MAR 87

Figure D - 1. Aim Point Graphic.

M6S-9¢-91 4
NOS-61-Ze

9
x
a
4
@
m
[e}
2
au
z=
92
n
;
<
4
C
°
Ss

TAC-05-01

TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_12.jpeg:
Threats

While evaluating target orientation, consider terminal threats which, if
known, may be avoided with sufficient planning. If the terminal area
threats cannot be avoided or suppressed, they will dictate the use of
minimum exposure tactics, attack ingress and egress axis, and altitudes.

Attack Axis Selection

The threat and target-ordnance compatibility will dictate your attack axis.
If not, choose an approach to the target that best suits your delivery. For
example, if a long range loft delivery is the option of choice using radar or
laser ranging, you need to ensure that you have unobstructed line-of-sight
to the target in sufficient time to get valid ranging. An attack axis that
places terrain between you and the target during the delivery can produce
ranging errors that could cause excessive miss distances. For planned
visual deliveries, choose significant visual update points that allow you to
work big to small and lead you to the target.

For LGB deliveries choose an attack axis that will give line of sight to the
target for prerelease acquisition and throughout the planned designation
maneuver. Run-in heading or designation maneuver may have to be
altered to reduce podium affect for LGB guidance.

Weather

Target area weather can be a main determinant of how you plan your
attack. A low ceiling generally denies visual diving deliveries. If not
planned for, bad weather can directly affect mission success.

When coordinating with the forecasters, determine the expected ceiling,
visibility, freezing level, winds, target area altimeter setting, contrail
level, transmissivity and note other hazards. For sequential visual or IR
attacks, plan so that the smoke from the bomb explosion of the first
aircraft does not obscure the target area for following aircraft. This may
be complicated by the effects of wind. Develop a plan but be flexible
enough to adjust to the conditions actually encountered.

Sun azimuth and elevation can be used to your advantage. Attacking or
egressing using the sun can degrade enemy IR systems in the target area

and make you more difficult to acquire visually.

By the same token the sun can also degrade your ability to find the target,
particularly in low sun angle conditions. Pull-ups for loft and diving

TAC-5 D-6


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_13.jpeg:
deliveries can also be a problem when running toward the sun. The HUD
presentation can, at times, be totally washed out.

Planned Ordnance

When fragged with unfamiliar ordnance or fuzes, make a thorough review
of preflight requirements in TO 1-1M-34 and TO 1F-15E-34-1-1. Set the
applicable laser code, ECM setting, spin rate, etc. Review the applicable
carriage, employment, and jettison limits contained in Chapter 5 of the
Dash 1. If JMEMs or experience tells you another munition would be
more effective, coordinate to change the fragged ordnance.

Frag Deconfliction

For element attacks you have to plan for frag deconfliction between
members of the flight. The basic approaches are to use time, altitude or
horizontal methods. Refer to TAC-2 and TO 1-1M-34 for a detailed
discussion. Specific safe escape maneuvers are found in TO
1F-15E-34-1-3. Escape maneuver execution should be briefed for each
delivery.

Attack Profile Selection

Attack profiles are chosen to survive the threat and achieve the required
accuracy and weapon effects. Level and diving deliveries require target
overflight and provide the crew the most time to correct for navigational
errors. The major problem is that a “show” target is normally required.
Terminal area threats, however, may dictate the use of standoff deliveries.
Low altitude toss (sensor designated or visual) and loft deliveries provide
some degree of standoff.

Once the profile is decided, an immediate reattack option should be
planned to deal with system degrades or threat reactions.

The reattack plan must be coordinated to provide deconfliction from other
aircraft in the strike package. This may mean flowing out of the target
area and reattacking during an alternate TOT, or a reattack within the
original TOT window. Time constraints imposed by support assets may
also alter/affect the reattack plan. You must ensure SEAD and other
support assets critical for success have the fuel/weapons to stay on station
for a reattack.

D-7 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_14.jpeg:
Delivery Computations

Auto deliveries allow flexibility but ballistic computations still need to be
done to ensure that fuze arming and safe escape requirements are met.
Take the time to plan a manual back-up in the event of CC failure. TO
1-1M-34, TO 1F-15E-34-1-8, and/or the CWDS program are required for
this. The need to default to a back-up delivery may cause a change in the
ingress flow to the target.

Delivery

Use target study to develop the best attack axis and desired delivery type.
With this information, work backwards from the target to an initial point
(IP). Look for a routing that makes maximum use of the terrain for
masking and navigation updating. Since most targets worth hitting will
be defended and/or camouflaged you may need to use terrain and cultural
features to funnel yourself to find the target. Having a good idea of the
big things around the target enhances visual search and helps to acquire
the target in time to employ ordnance. For system auto and loft deliveries
the same planning discipline helps you to verify the designation prior to
the pull.

Sensor Integration

Sensor integration requires adequate preflight planning. Planning for the
air-to-ground radar and TGT IR is discussed in detail in a separate Sensor
Planning lesson. The considerations addressed there apply in the target
area as well.

Targeting IR planning begins with your inputs to the forecaster. The
Tactical Decision Aid (TDA) they supply will allow you to plan when to
take action and at what range to expect to have usable video. The second
requirement is to attain line-of-sight with the target or offset.

Real beam map (RBM) is also a viable alternative if it is properly planned.
If nothing else, have an idea of what the scope should look like prior to
commanding an HRM map. Targeting can also be accomplished using
RBM. The switch actions and flow are identical to HRM, but radar scope
interpretation is much more difficult.

TAC-5 D-8


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_15.jpeg:
Target Designations

With proper planning you will get airborne with a NAV designation at a
minimum. To enhance designation accuracy, update the system at some
point prior to the target (the closer the better). With a tight INS, a
mission nav reset prior to the attack run may provide sufficient accuracy
for visual deliveries.

The procedures and planning considerations involved in getting a radar
designation were discussed in detail in A/G radar academics. To reduce
the errors induced by coordinate transformations, try to map target direct
whenever possible. Update the MN and then designate.

In determining the type of designation, always start with the most
accurate as the primary option. You should default down the hierarchy
only as required to handle system degradation, or to counter the threat.

In a composite threat environment, a good rule of thumb is to
update/designate early and often. This keeps you from missing the
planned opportunity due to threat reactions, degraded systems or switch
errors. Do not forget to evaluate and, if necessary, to update system
altitude. It is a vital component of the bombing equation and sensor
cueing.

NAV FLIR

If the navigation pod is loaded it can be used to see through some of the
smoke and dust that may be present in the target area. The FLIR may
not be used alone. Night/low altitude deliveries will normally use the TF
system. A nav pod boresight in this case is extremely important if a visual
delivery is planned.

Finalizing the Plan

Once the routing from the IP to the target is decided, start developing the
big picture of where all the other known players will be during the ingress
and egress. Within your formation, know where each flight member will
be throughout the attack flow and be attentive to where conflicts may
develop. The biggest problem is frag deconfliction. Review the plan in
detail to be sure that minor deviations do not cause unacceptable risk.

D-9 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_16.jpeg:
Attack Schematic

Now the ideas of how to get into and out of the target area need to be put
down on paper. In this case an attack schematic or stick diagram is a
useful tool. As seen in Figure D-2, show the intended route of flight,
emphasize significant terrain or cultural features, and show how the
formation flows out of the target. Placing the diagram on a 1:50,000 scale
chart works well, but at times the extensive detail can be distracting.
Techniques for putting additional information on the schematic vary. For
illustrative purposes, heading and distance from the IP to a pull-up-point
are included. Do not forget to include INS data on your schematic. With a
good update/designation, distance and heading information is extremely
accurate. This will help save the delivery when you have to jink for
threats and use a different attack axis. The final attack heading and
ballistic parameters are also available. The egress flow takes into
consideration each frag pattern, and a bugout heading to a clear area is
the first heading on the egress.

TAC-5 D-10


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_17.jpeg:
CALL SIGN | AREA/TIME | GCI/FREQs |JOKER/BINGO
/\ 43,

ATTACK TYPE
20/20 HI SPLIT

45°L/3.8NM

SPLASH #1 ==

vac cee 37°R/4.3NM sage 7"
500KCAS —ennpACK = 5 4NM

5.7

7.2
REL 5.0

MIN 4.5
20° DIVE 450 KCAS

12
115°/9.2NM AOD 3.9
28" % DIL 62%

TAC-05-02

Figure D - 2. Attack Schematic.

D-11 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_18.jpeg:
EN ROUTE NAVIGATION

Route of flight may be dictated in the ATO. If not, the choice of routing
should consider circumnavigating the threat, if fuel permits. Also look at
the intelligence situation and pick a routing that minimizes exposure. If
support assets like jammers or HARM platforms are working in a specific
area, approaching near their sector may be beneficial. Again, threats and
fuel are the biggest determinants in route selection.

Steer points along the route should be visually significant to aid in
navigation and system updates. Remember when choosing steer points or
a route of flight that a good visual point (e.g. bridge or major intersection)
may be heavily defended. A harder to identify but less heavily defended
point may be better. Work with intelligence to get the best possible
coordinate information for aim points and offsets along the route. Plan
several offsets/aim points on the friendly side of the forward edge of the
battle area (FEBA). Once in enemy territory, you may not have a chance
for another update. However, additional offsets/aim points should be
planned, and used if threats allow. When approaching the target area,
you want your system as accurate as possible.

Fuel Planning

Fuel planning, using manual charts from the TO 1-F-15E-1-1 or AFMSS,
has to include all expected dashes in the target area, crossing the FEBA,
and maneuvering defensive reactions. If carrying external tanks, decide
on a feed plan that allows survival. In a dense air threat environment,
you may consider feeding CFT fuel prior to external tank fuel to be able to
reduce gross weight quickly if defensively engaged. Make sure you always
plan enough to get to a divert base.

Remember that fuel planning is directly affected by your choice of altitude
and speed. Go only as low and only as fast as required. An immediate
transition from takeoff to 300 feet for a 250-mile trip to the FEBA is
probably not tactically required or prudent from a planning perspective.

Joker and Bingo fuel planning should be based on a best case, and a
HUNG ordnance worst case. Theater rules will dictate minimum fuel
requirements for recovery. Plan ahead for fuel divert fields and do not
press the issue; divert early and avoid the rush.

Rule of thumb: Use 2000-2500 lbs/min for AB.

TAC-5 D-12


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_19.jpeg:
Formation Selection

The formation chosen is most influenced by the threat. Weather, terrain
and aircraft/crew capabilities will also influence the type of formation.
While going from one formation to another ensure the radar and visual
search responsibilities are commensurate with the threat. Radar sorting
plans may also need to be modified. See AFTTP 3-1, Volume XVII and
AFTTP 3-3, Volume XVII for more detail.

If running nonvisual parallel tracks with another aircraft or element, be
very specific about deconfliction rules and sort/commit criteria. Parallel
tracks work well when attempting to push a large number of aircraft
through an area simultaneously. This has application when attempting to
saturate the defenses but more so when taking advantage of suppression
efforts that have short influence times.

Low Altitude Considerations
Terrain

To help reduce the chances of being visually acquired, attempt to fly over
roughly textured terrain to break up the aircraft's shadow. Flying in the
shadow of a cloud or mountain can also help. When given the option, fly
around any body of water, dry lake bed, open field, or similar areas. They
provide easy line-of-sight and good fields of fire. Climbing to diffuse your
shadow over this type of feature may require an altitude of 4000-5000 feet
and is probably not tactically sound.

Avoid flying along lines of communication like highways, canals, rail lines,
power lines, etc. This applies on either side of the FEBA. On our side of
the FEBA you are relying on being rapidly identified as a friendly. This
may not occur. You may also be flying across the enemy's target area.
Cross these areas as close to 90° as possible to minimize exposure. Always
be prepared to defend yourself.

Altitude and Airspeed

Go only as low and only as fast as dictated by the tactical situation. Use
420 KCAS as an operational minimum at low altitude. Maximum speed is
determined by stores, systems (TF), ROE, other aircraft in the package or
basic aircraft limit. Use speed to compensate for timing to meet a TOT.
Planning a route correction (turning short or extending a turn point)
eliminates dramatic power changes. Techniques vary, but use of
command ground speed or ETA on the Data 1/2 page are the most
common.

D-18 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
27534.

Supersedes: TAC-5, September, 1997

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_20.jpeg:
FEBA/FLOT/FSCL Crossing

Front line defenses both on the ingress and egress have to be dealt with.
Conditions permitting, high altitude overflight of short range air defenses
is preferred. If this is not possible, a low level penetration option needs to
be planned. First, visually supportive formations should be used to
provide warning of short range stern engagements. AN/ALE 45
programming should be planned based on the expected threat, but use
should be driven by observed threats. AFTTP 3-1, Vol II contains a good
discussion of reactive and preemptive defensive maneuvering reactions for
both AAA and short range missile engagements. Review that section and
incorporate the appropriate reactions in your training scenarios.

Plan to cross the FEBA where there are minimal to no threats. The
enemy cannot be everywhere. When approaching the FEBA, align to cross
perpendicular if possible. This limits exposure by providing the shortest
path into the rear area. This desire needs to be tempered with some
judgment. A more oblique routing over terrain that is unaccessible to
ground forces may be a better option.

Prior to FEBA crossing, EMCON becomes a real factor in limiting the
enemy's engagement capability. Whether EMIS LIMIT or selective
shutdown of emitters is used, deny passive detection if able. If the enemy
uses passive detection to orient air defenses the first indication of
detection may be a missile in the air.

Threat Reaction

The first rule is to avoid the threat. Plan formations and route of flight to
optimize radar and visual search. Offset any known surface threat or
enemy CAP obtained in the pre-mission intelligence briefing. If engaged
en route, strive to maintain element integrity. When engaged by a surface
threat, establishing a flow away from the threat and toward the next steer
point will keep you from anchoring in a high density surface threat
environment. Under certain circumstances your ordnance can be used in
self-defense, such as in a bomb-in-face (BIF) maneuver.

Strip criteria and element threat reactions need to be briefed in detail and
a rejoin flow established to maintain/regain mutual support.

TAC-5 D-14


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_21.jpeg:
Commit criteria for air threats need to be delineated. When tasked
air-to-surface, remember that the mission is bombs on target, on time, not
to become Ace of the Base. Engaging a threat may highlight you if the
bandit did not know you were there. Engage threats that will prevent you
from accomplishing your mission. Normally a commit range/alt is briefed
to help determine which air-to-air threats to engage. For instance you
might commit on all bandits within 20 nm or 10,000’ of your formation if
you believe the bandits are aware of your position. Bandit aspect angle,
bandit maneuvers and RWR may help you determine if the bandits are
“aware.” Establish a jettison plan that enhances defensive maneuvering
potential but retains some air-to-surface capability, if possible. The
jettison decision is an important one. Jettisoning early makes the bandit's
mission a success if you did not take out the target. As a rule of thumb, if
a turn of more than 180° is needed and you are still defensively engaged,
your BFM skills are now most important to the war effort. If your threat
reaction takes you below 400 kts and you are still defensive, now would be
a good time to jettison your ordnance to maintain airspeed.

Route Plan
Figure D-3 is an example of a basic route plan diagram consisting of steer

points, significant geographical landmarks, timing requirements and
major tasks to perform.

D-15 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_22.jpeg:
11:52:01

SMALL
KNOLL RD INTXN = 11:50:29
= RIVER BEND
5.1 S
S
oD

11:49:02

RO/POWER LINE
INTX

11:47:31
271 BRIDGE
2
30R/8NM | 13NM
MAST ARM
PENNINSULA
11:56:42
IN PUSH 3
Oo Ness
RD/RR INTX 1A
7.1 11:57:23
SUBSTATION
RAA 9500' MSL
10.
RD BEND
12:03:43 AIRCRAFT TAC-05-03
ON RWY
12:05:00

Figure D - 3. Route Schematic.
TAC-5 D-16


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_23.jpeg:
Actual clock times of arrival at each steer point can be computed by
current flight planning programs. This allows you to plan ahead for
timing corrections.

Speed corrections, like push-it-up points, should be clearly annotated.
Individual route leg MEAs can be life saving when dealing with
unexpected weather or equipment failures especially during TF ops.
Frequency changes, altitude restrictions, EMCON plan, and search and
formation position changes can also be annotated to get the entire plan in
graphic form. Another technique for managing this wealth of information
is to annotate it on the low level route book where it should occur (Figure
D-4). Be careful not to put too much information on your route diagram or
it may become cluttered and difficult to read, and act more as a hindrance
than a help.

D-17 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_24.jpeg:
A
08:27:13 / \

12,000 LBS / 122

#2 SYSTEMS 00:24:56

CHAN 12 MAIN

|FF OFF ————______»

A“
/ N\
PUSH UP — 540 166 ».

415 AGL +06+17

03 AGL | 50 |
es ae

i) ay
ee Pe sa.

TAC-05-04

Figure D - 4. Low Level Route Planning.

TAC-5 D-18


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_25.jpeg:
RTB

Once you have expended your ordnance, you are only halfway done; so the
route study used in getting to the target applies to the recovery as well.
Additional considerations include unexpended/hung ordnance, fuels and
procedures, divert fields, safe areas, jettison, dump targets, safe passage
procedures, etc. Threats along the egress flow are just as dangerous as
ingress threats, and you also may have to face your own approaching
forces at high speed and low altitude.

GROUND OPS

It is just as important to plan for ground operations as it is to plan for
airborne ops. Poor ground ops can easily make a mission go awry.
Ordnance loads and the rest of the aircraft configuration must be
confirmed with maintenance. Check with maintenance to ensure that the
proper fuzing is used and that all settings are correct. This may be done
by the squadron supervisor or “ramp rat” but coordination should be done
with these individuals to ensure the aircraft and munitions are as
planned. Additionally, these individuals should have the parking spot
locations to aid in establishing a taxi and arming flow. Do not wait until
arriving at the aircraft because there will not be enough time to correct
the load. If a comm-out launch is planned, confirm key visual signals with
the maintenance super, along with the rest of the flight and ground/tower.
Know the taxi plan. Getting 24 jets to the active runway is a lot like a
ballet. Everyone has to be in the right place at the right time.

CONTINGENCIES
Go/No-Go Decisions

Certain abort decisions will be made for you. Some will be based on
systems and others on circumstances. Each unit normally operates with
an established minimum essential system list (MESL). If certain systems
are inoperative, the aircraft is not mission capable and you would not
expose it and yourself to needless attrition. Realize also that a
Commander's judgement may also come into play. He may be forced by
the importance of the mission to send you anyway. That is why they call
it war.

D-19 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_26.jpeg:
Weather

The actual weather encountered en route and in the target area may vary
significantly from the forecast. This may affect both en route navigation
and the attack phase. Deliveries both above and below the weather
should be considered, depending on the threat.

Checks

System and fence checks need to be accomplished as early as possible in
the mission to be able to lead turn problems that may affect the primary
plan.

Losses

The mission may be aborted due to the loss of certain planned support
assets. Examples here may be SEAD assets, jammers, AWACs, etc.
Package and mission commanders should develop a minimum go package
configuration during planning.

IFF Procedures

IFF phasing and Mode 4 use need incorporation into flight planning. At
the same time, AAI mode changes are also required to help distinguish
friend from foe.

Departure and Recovery

Be prepared to defend yourself during the departure and recovery phases
of the mission. Flare-only on the CMD may be a prudent action in the
vicinity of the airfield. Attempt to use comm out procedures to the
maximum extent possible.

While on the ground, avoid staggered taxi at close intervals that would
make the flight a lucrative target. If conditions allow, arm and de-arm in
dispersal locations. Taxi should be single-ship straight to takeoff or back
to park as appropriate.

In the peacetime environment, throttle back a bit and take the required
time in arming and de-arming.

TAC-5 D - 20


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_27.jpeg:
Battle Damage

The immediate priority after sustaining battle damage is to determine the
airworthiness of the aircraft. If able to remain airborne, put a safe area or
recovery base on the nose and monitor fuel status. Coordinate crew
ejection procedures.

Escort

The desire to escort a damaged aircraft needs to be balanced against the
risk of exposing that aircraft and yourself to detection by surface and
airborne threats. If close escort is planned, there are three simple options.
The first is a simple weave behind or offset from the damaged aircraft.
This pattern enhances visual lookout to 6 o’clock but can dramatically
increase fuel consumption if heavy maneuvering is required to maintain
sight. It can also highlight the damaged aircraft position. A second option
is a moving racetrack pattern. This allows flying longer legs straight and
level. It also points the radar to the damaged aircraft’s six for longer
range detection of enemy air. The disadvantage is that you may not be in
a position to immediately employ ordnance in defense of the escorted
aircraft. Fuel consumption may become a factor in continuing the escort.
Attempts to close escort in a dense surface threat environment may not be
prudent. The third option is to call AWACS or any F-15Cs in the package
and have them provide air escort to the damaged aircraft. This may
require some time and extensive radio coordination.

Rescue Operations (RESCAP)

Reaction to the downing of a comrade has to be tempered by the tactical
situation. In a densely defended target area, marking their position and
passing that information up channel may be the only option. On the
friendly side of the FEBA you may be able to establish a CAP over their
position and coordinate recovery efforts. If an air threat is still a
consideration, CAP at tactically appropriate airspeeds and set the bingo
fuel based on recovery at a suitable airfield.

D-21 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_28.jpeg:
MISSION DATA
Each aircraft should have a copy of the following information:
@ MC/DTM load

e Sequence points (coordinate accuracy is vital for
updates/designations)

e List points (should be in a logical order and available for
contingencies)

e IFF phasing (must agree with frag)

e¢ Comm 1, comm 2 (logical order that minimizes manual frequency
use)

e Although it is not necessary to take a copy of it to the jet, make
sure the PACS is programmed properly and the radar is set up as
required.

@® Comm plan
e Code words (use as few as possible)
e HAVE QUICK/KY-58
e Frequency and chattermark plan (have all possible frequencies
available)
e Callsigns (who, where, when)
e Authentication procedures
e In-flight report formats and requirements

@ Maps

e Overview map (for big picture to use with bullseye points)
e Stick map / Route of Flight

@ Flight plan

e Form 70 or equivalent
@ Weapons delivery data

e Schematic

e Primary/back-up plans

e Ballistic/safe escape data

@ Radar predictions and photographs for TGT IR

TAC-5 D - 22


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_29.jpeg:
@ Divert field information

e Coordinates
e Comm
e Procedures

It is very important that all this data is properly organized so that it can
be easily retrieved when needed. Do not leave it laying around the cockpit
or, with the first unload, it may be unreachable down in the cables or
under the seat.

CONCLUSION
This lesson has presented basic rules of thumb for planning and
highlighted some areas that have often been forgotten or neglected. More

extensive approaches are covered in AFTTP 3-1 and in your unit mission
planning guides.

D - 238 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_3.jpeg:
TACTICS

COVER

MISSION PLANNING
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to provide a starting reference for mission
planning. It addresses the major planning considerations required for
effective mission execution. The emphasis is on day, VMC employment.
Night or IMC operations require additional planning considerations.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 000. eececeesneccesnceeeesaeesesaeeseesaeecssaeeesssaeeesseeeesaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eee eee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00... eee eeeeeeeeeeee C-1
CELA a snes sass ons cosa cou nas oes cnn cones ents ans SOR MNSA Ss SARIS MU KOT HEH SONS SSIS Ge Mo eS Haas GHEE D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo. ceeseeeeseeceseeeensaeeseseeeessaeeseseaeeeneas N/A
SRS sere ce asec crass sre ce ae eos es cece cet ese ee rs cece ct seme sees se aoe cee eae ws F-1

A-1 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_30.jpeg:
ACO

ATO

BIF

DMPI

DOC

FEBA

INS

IP

JMEM

MEA

MESL

RBM

RESCAP

ROE

SCL

SEAD

TDA

TF

TOT

UCM

GLOSSARY

Airspace coordination order

Air tasking order

Bomb in face

Desired mean point of impact
Directed operational capability
Forward edge of battle area
Inertial navigation system

Initial point

Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual
Minimum en route altitude
Minimum essential list

Real beam map

Rescue operations

Rules of engagement

Standard conventional load
Suppression of enemy air defenses
Tactical decision aid

Terrain following

Time on target

Uniformed Code of Military Justice

F-1 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify information available in an Air Tasking Order.

2. Identify the significance of specific mission planning considerations
for target area, en route and departure/recovery.

3. Identify the applicable technical order, manual or regulation needed
for specific mission planning information.

4. Identify standard procedures for handling mission contingencies.

NOTE

These CROs will be evaluated on Surface Attack Tactics (SAT) missions.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1
TO 1F-15E-34-1-1

TO 1F-15E-34-1-3

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1-1

TO 1-1M-34

AFTTP 3-1, Vol I, II, & 17
AFTTP 3-3, Vol XVII

TAC-5 B-1


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS
1. Study this workbook.

2. Review the applicable sections of the following publications:
AFTTP 3-1, Vol I, Mission Planning Section
AFTTP 3-1, Vol II, Threat Countertactics
AFTTP 3-1, Vol 17, F-15E
AFTTP 3-3, Vol XVII
TO 1-1M-34, Section VIII, Mission Planning
TO IF-15E-1
TO 1F-15E-34-1-1
TO 1F-15E-34-1-3
TO 1F-15E-34-1-1-1

C-1 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

TAC-5 C-2


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

This course is designed to provide you with one approach to consolidating
information provided throughout the academic program, and applying it to
a specific mission, SAT-3.

Air Tasking Order (ATO)

The ATO is the vehicle by which an air component commander
communicates specific tasks to subordinate units. The format and actual
flow of the ATO vary with theater of operations and level of effort
involved.

In general, an ATO outlines air component efforts over a 24 hour period.
The ATO (also called a Frag) contains, at a minimum, the following

information:

Current Tactical Situation

This brief provides a general commander’s assessment of how well allied
efforts have achieved their objectives.

Air Component Objectives

This covers how forces have been allocated to different missions. It also
addresses where the main effort (which consists of CAS, OCA, DCA,
SEAD, interdiction, recce and airlift) will occur.

Rules of Engagement (ROE)

ROE can most easily be thought of as restrictions. They are generally
used to limit the scope of the conflict or collateral damage. ROE existed
during the Korean, Vietnam and Southwest Asian Wars. Failure to
comply with established ROE is normally punishable under the UCMJ.

In addition to specific mission ROE, each theater of operations normally
has a set of standing rules that you need to know and abide by. These
rules are outlined in applicable flying regulations and directives.
“Training Rules” are briefed prior to every flight in the FTU.

D-1 TAC-5


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_8.jpeg:
Specific Unit Tasking

Unit tasking is normally by mission type. For an interdiction mission, you
are assigned a mission number, call sign, the number of aircraft in the
mission, time on target (TOT), the target location, IFF codes, a standard
conventional load (SCL) and remarks to include tanker, suppression of
enemy air defenses (SEAD), OCA CAP and AWACS support.
Coordination requirements are normally included as remarks following
specific tasking. Once you locate your tasking you can scan the ATO to
determine what other assets are tasked in the same area. Also see if the
same target area is assigned to another unit to get a feel for the planned
flow in the target area. Look for tasked targets along your ingress and
egress routing to avoid overflight of an active target site.

Airspace Division

An airspace coordination order (ACO) is normally included in the ATO.
The ACO defines tanker tracks, special use airspace (i.e., AWACS orbits),
special routing and geographical areas of responsibility. It establishes
safe passage procedures that limit the potential of being engaged by
friendly defenses en route to or from the target. The ACO may dictate
specific routes or altitudes to be flown or use such discriminators as
airspeed, IFF, formation size, etc.

Compliance with safe passage procedures does not ensure safety. Be alert
at all times and be prepared to defend yourself from takeoff to landing.

Command, Control and Communications (C*)

This section establishes a frequency deconfliction plan for the force.
Frequencies are allocated for each portion of the effort. COMSEC needs to
be considered and discussed when operating on unsecure nets.

This C’ section also contains any codewords to be used during the period
of the ATO. Other information such as bullseye points, authenticators,
and SAR information may also be included.

The ROE, Communications plan and IFF information is usually in the
Special Instructions (SPINs) section of the ATO. The SPINs are usually
organized by the time period covered by the instructions. Permanent,
monthly and weekly SPINs are most common. Sometimes daily SPINs
are also included.

TAC-5 D-2


Text from TAC-5_Mission_Planning_page_9.jpeg:
Mission Planning Responsibilities

Once your flight has received its tasking, it is important to have a plan for
dividing up planning responsibilities. Although not all inclusive, the
following is a list of areas that need thorough planning:

Breaking the frag (ATO)
Target area

En route navigation
Ground ops
Contingencies

Mission data

This workbook outlines these planning areas.

Mission planning requirements vary greatly between units based on
directed operational capability (DOC) statements, geographic differences,
and sensor and weapon capabilities. The aircrew must be able to predict
what will be useful and when to devote attention to the task of identifying
a particular point.

It is vitally important that all personnel involved in mission planning
coordinate with each other. There is nothing worse than showing up at
brief time with three different IPs, two weapons loads, one cup of coffee
and no clue.

Frag Breaking

Getting the required information out of the frag is extremely important.
It may be best to have two people break the frag out separately, then
compare results to make sure there are no mistakes or omissions. If you
take the time to carefully examine the ATO, you can develop a big picture
of where all players will be during different phases of your flight.
Although certain support assets, such as jammers, may not be specifically
tasked to support your mission, you may have the flexibility to route your
flight to take advantage of their capabilities. No mission planning can
begin until all the information is extracted from the frag.

D-3 TAC-5


