Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

OPERATIONS
OPS-2
AIRCRAFT HANDLING
CHARACTERISTICS (AHC)

MARCH 2000

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_10.jpeg:
AOA Warning Tones

A 900 Hz double tone (two short 10Hz beeps followed by a .3 second pause) is
available to cue the aircrew when a programmed angle of attack limit is
exceeded. In addition to the warning tone, the AOA units displayed in the
HUD will flash when this limit is exceeded. The system limit defaults to

30 units at power up with CFTs, external air-to-ground stores, or
miscellaneous stores loaded on the aircraft. The system can be programmed
for 20 to 50 units through the HUD repeater format. Enter the desired value
(20-50 units) in the UFC scratchpad and then depress PB #15 on the HUD
repeater to enter the value. Setting 46 to 50 units disables the AOA warning
tone. The gear down AOA tone is a high pitch (1600 Hz) beeping tone, which
starts at 28.4 units. The beep rate increases as AOA increases. The tone can
be eliminated by decreasing AOA.

Coefficient of Lift (C,) Versus AOA

The generalized C, versus AOA curve for a high speed, swept wing aircraft
(Figure D-2) illustrates the way C,, varies with changing AOA.

C, MAX = MAXIMUM LIFT COEFFICIENT
As = STALL AOA OPS-02-02

Figure D - 2. C, Versus AOA.

OPS-2 D-4


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_11.jpeg:
Lift coefficient increases as AOA increases to some maximum value of C,, at
which point any further increase in AOA results in decreased lift. As the
figure shows, this happens in the negative AOA direction also.

The AOA associated with C,, MAX is the classic “stall” AOA (alpha). An
aircraft can be limited to some AOA less than alpha due to control authority
limits or a handling qualities limit.

In any event, whatever limits the maximum usable AOA or C, ends up
determining the definition for stall in that aircraft. The stall itself may be
spectacular or a nonevent, but it is always a limit to performance. In the
F-15E, classic stall AOA is never achieved due to the aft stick stabilator limit
being reached before actual C, MAX.

Coefficient of Lift (C,) Versus Coefficient of Drag (Cp)

In studying the effect of AOA on performance, it is necessary to look at how
drag is related to lift production. It is referred to by several names, but
regardless of what it is called, the relationship of drag to lift is the root of
aircraft performance.

D-5 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_12.jpeg:
A typical curve showing this lift versus drag relationship is shown in

Figure D-3. Unless the aircraft under study is a glider, the L/D relationships
must be related to engine performance in order to determine optimum
performance.

This data is presented in 1F-15E-1-1 Performance Data. These work for
preflight planning purposes; but for in-flight situations, charts are not
practical and rules of thumb that produce near optimum performance are of
much greater value.

12

L/D

OPS-2

0.24

0.20

0.08

0.04

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 OPS-02-03

Figure D - 3. Generic C,, Versus Cp Curve.


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_13.jpeg:
AOA Rules of Thumb

Best cruise and best loiter (endurance) is a concern at one time or another
during any flying career (e.g., first the crew is told to divert, and at the divert
base, is told to hold). The crew needs simple solutions to generate near
optimum performance.

In the F-15E, 14 units AOA at or below 25,000 feet or 14.5 units AOA above
25,000 feet establishes optimum cruise. This should give max range for the
present altitude; and, if the aircraft goes to the optimum altitude for the
configuration (probably near the tropopause), this should provide the overall
max range.

For max endurance, 18 units AOA at or below 25,000 feet or 17 units AOA
above 25,000 feet works well. Maximum endurance is not altitude sensitive.
Climbing to optimum holding altitude does reduce fuel flow, but it takes more
than an hour to save the extra fuel used to climb.

In a fighter aircraft, turn performance is also a major concern. Of interest
are the maximum turn and the optimum turn. The max turn for any set of
conditions is easy for the F-15E because it is obtained at full aft stick, or the
G limit, whichever comes first. Be careful though, because in many
configurations, there is a 30-unit AOA limit. The max turn can normally be
sustained only for a few seconds before you must ease off the stick to stay
below 30 units. Airspeed will bleed off at a high rate when performing a max
turn.

The optimum turn refers to the maximum turn rate that can be maintained
without losing energy. Generally, an optimum energy-conserving turn
requires about 16-22 units AOA.

So now you have some AOAs to put in your bag of tricks. To obtain generic,
near optimum performance inside the envelope, fly:

8-10 units for best acceleration

14/14.5 units for max range cruise (25,000 feet or > 25,000 feet)

18/17 units for max endurance (25,000 feet or > 25,000 feet)

16-22 units for optimum, energy-sustaining turns

28-30 units for best rate

Aircraft G limiter full aft stick for max turns (unless otherwise limited by
AOA)

D-7 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_14.jpeg:
NORMAL FLIGHT CHARACTERISTICS

Normal flight characteristics deal with the subjects of stability, control and
maneuverability. Of interest are: how easily you are able to change an
aircraft’s flight path (maneuverability), how much effort you must expend to
keep the aircraft’s nose pointed forward (controllability) and how the aircraft
responds to small disturbances (stability).

These three areas are tied together and are usually not constant throughout
the flight envelope. As a matter of fact, in high-speed aircraft that carry
expendable stores, large changes in stability and control can occur in flight.

Terms and Relationships

Stability deals with the reaction of systems disturbed from equilibrium. It is
described as being positive, negative or neutral. Positive indicates a tendency
to return to equilibrium once disturbed. Negative indicates a tendency to
move away from equilibrium. Neutral implies no tendency to regain or move
away from equilibrium. Figure D-4 illustrates this concept.

POSITIVE A NEGATIVE B NEUTRAL C

OPS-02-04

Figure D - 4. Static Stability Hlustration.

Static stability refers to the initial tendency to return to equilibrium, and
dynamic stability refers to the tendency to finally settle back at the original
condition. Dynamic stability can also be positive, negative or neutral.
Another look at Figure D-4 reveals that only the system with positive static
stability has any chance of being dynamically stable.

OPS-2 D-8


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_15.jpeg:
Maneuverability deals with how easy it is to intentionally alter the
equilibrium condition. It can be viewed as being opposed to stability.

Controllability deals with the ease with which equilibrium can be
maintained.

As stability is increased, maneuverability decreases and it becomes difficult
to change the aircraft’s flight path. On the other hand, as stability is
decreased, maneuverability increases, but the flight path becomes more
difficult to control. Stability can be decreased to a point where controlling the
aircraft becomes a full time job; and finally, in aircraft such as the F-16,
control is impossible with a manual flight control system.

A fighter should be as maneuverable as possible, but not require a pilot’s full
effort to control it. This puts limits on stability. When stability is reduced to
enhance maneuverability, there are ways to provide apparent stability.
Variable gain flight controls and stability augmenters can make an aircraft
seem more stable to the pilot than it really is.

The F-15E uses variable gain controls. Pitch and roll channel response is
modified to compensate for changing aerodynamic conditions. The F-15E also
employs a control augmentation system (CAS) in pitch, roll and yaw. The
CAS complements manual control inputs and provides damping.

These systems together provide the controllability of a fairly stable aircraft.
At the same time, maneuverability is very good and similar to that available
in a marginally stable aircraft.

AOA and Mach Effects

As mentioned earlier, stability of an aircraft is not constant throughout its
flight envelope. Variations in AOA and Mach number change the stability of
an aircraft. The effects of these variations on the F-15E are discussed below.

D-9 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_16.jpeg:
AOA Effects

As long as AOA remains in the linear portion of the C, versus AOA curve,
aircraft stability is not affected by changes in AOA. However, when AOA
goes well beyond this straight line area, airflow patterns over the airframe
change significantly. Flow separation occurs from some areas, and flow
blanking occurs in other areas.

Flow separation results in the center of pressure moving forward, reducing
stability. The result is a tendency for nose rise or pitch up. Less stabilator
input is required to raise the nose. Flow blanking, on the other hand, affects
the vertical tails. Reducing flow over the tails reduces their contribution to
directional stability.

The net result of the changes at high AOA is an overall reduction of stability
and controllability at a time when control becomes critical. The changes can

make operating at very high AOA dangerous.

Mach Effects

Airflow characteristics vary with Mach number; in general, supersonic flow
becomes incompressible. In the transonic region, as the airflow pattern
changes from one of primarily subsonic flow to supersonic flow, there is a
large center of pressure change (from approximately .25 to .560 MAC (mean
aerodynamic cord)). This change generates a large nose down pitching
moment, which is known as Mach tuck.

As airspeed changes from supersonic to subsonic, the center of pressure
moves forward, which generates a large nose up pitching moment, known as
transonic dig-in. These characteristics may cause control difficulties when
operating near Mach 1.

In addition to changes in longitudinal (pitch) stability, directional (yaw)
stability changes with Mach number. In general, directional stability
increases through Mach 1 and then begins to decrease. The sweep back of
the wing adds to directional stability in the transonic region, but its effects
are overcome at higher Mach numbers (sweep back needs to increase). At
high Mach numbers lift decreases and the vertical tail surfaces lose
effectiveness at generating side loads to offset side slip, leading to reduced
directional stability.

OPS-2 D-10


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_17.jpeg:
F-15E Flight Controls

Since Mach and AOA effects tend to change aircraft response to pilot inputs,
and changing response may lead to overcontrol, the F-15E flight control
system was designed to compensate. The automatic flight control system
(AFCS) modifies aircraft response so as to mask the changes in stability
caused by AOA and Mach effects. Hence, nose rise, pitch-up, stick force
lightening, Mach tuck and transonic dig-in do not show themselves in a
normally functioning Eagle. The phenomena are present, but are not
apparent to the pilot.

This means the pilot can maneuver aggressively throughout the envelope
with little fear of overcontrol. Remember, though, the destabilizing
phenomena are real and must be dealt with by the pilot if the AFCS is not
doing its job.

Landing Configuration

The landing configuration alters an aircraft’s basic stability for several
reasons. Gear struts and doors alter airflow patterns and create pitching
forces. Raising and lowering gear changes the aircraft CG. Moving flaps
changes wing shape and effective lift. All of these changes combine to reduce
longitudinal and directional stability and/or limit stabilator authority.

The F-15E flight control system compensates, in part, for the landing
configuration. However, since full aileron and differential stab response to
lateral stick is available at any longitudinal stick position when the landing
gear is down, significant adverse yaw may exist at high AOA. An AOA limit
of 30 units has been established to prevent departure in the landing
configuration. The 1600 Hz AOA tone will sound at 28.4 units AOA in the
landing configuration to help prevent departures.

D-11 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_18.jpeg:
ADVERSE HANDLING CHARACTERISTICS

This section looks at some configurations and conditions encountered which
affect the F-15Es handling characteristics.

External Stores

Adding external stores to an aircraft does three things: changes airflow and
air loads, changes the center of gravity and adds weight. Since these three
factors influence handling characteristics, it is safe to say adding external
stores to an aircraft changes its handling characteristics. Just how and to
what magnitude handling characteristics change is another story. Among
other things, stores affect more than one axis.

OPS-2 D-12


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_19.jpeg:
Symmetrically Loaded Stores

Aerodynamic Effects: External stores are aerodynamically unstable in
themselves, and they tend to aerodynamically destabilize an aircraft in one or
more axes. Fuselage stores reduce lateral/directional stability, while wing
stores reduce longitudinal stability.

CG Effects: Loading stores change the aircraft CG. The CG movement may
be in any or all three axes. Longitudinal changes affect pitch stability.
Lateral changes affect lateral/directional stability and departure/spin
susceptibility. Vertical changes are usually not terribly significant.
Longitudinal changes are usually of most interest and are, in fact, the only
ones routinely computed for the crew by the wing quality assurance function.
As CG moves forward, the aircraft becomes more stable. As CG moves aft,
the aircraft becomes less stable in pitch. The same statement generally
applies to directional stability as well. Figure D-5 illustrates the effects of
external stores on overall aircraft stability.

F-15E

Lu
—_
< 4
D +— F-15E + -4CFTs
v3
g 5 /,— F-15E + -4CFTs + LANTIRN
A

1 ~

“N

STATIC MARGIN - PERCENT MAC

v 0 va FASE + -ACFTs + LANTIRN
lu /
q ~~ + ONS + 12 CBU-58
TF y— FASE + -ACETs + LANTIRN
Zz -2 + WING PYLONS WITH WING
> TANKS + 12 CBU-58
w 4 (UNAUTHORIZED CONFIGURATION)
=
-4
04 05 06 O7 O08 09 10
MACH NUMBER
CENTER OF GRAVITY = 29% MAC ALTITUDE = 5,000 FT

OPS-02-05

Figure D - 5. Stores Effects on Stability.

D-18 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: OPS-2, January, 1999

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_20.jpeg:
Inertial Effects: Stores add mass to the aircraft (for some, the mass is quite
large). This mass equates to added inertia; thus, it is harder to get the
aircraft to move and harder to get it to stop once motion is established. Since
the mass distribution is changed along with the total mass, inertial response
and inertial coupling are also changed in all three axes. On the plus side, the
added mass tends to dampen short term disturbances, providing a more solid
feeling aircraft.

Total Effect: The total effect of loading external stores on the F-15E is a
combination of all the individual effects. The F-15E flight control system
compensates for much of the change caused by loading stores, but not all.
The aircraft is somewhat more sluggish due to inertial effects. The aircraft is
more susceptible to departure at high AOA due to store instability. Ifa
departure occurs, it is more violent than in the clean aircraft. Also, recovery
from out-of-control situations normally takes longer.

Asymmetrically Loaded Stores

The aerodynamic, CG and inertial effects of asymmetrically loaded stores are
the same as for symmetrically loaded stores. However, rolling and yaw
moments are created due to the unbalanced loads. Once again, the flight
control system can, up to a point, compensate for these moments. At high
AOA, the flight control inputs needed to counter the asymmetry can be more
than the system can provide and may greatly increase departure and spin
susceptibility. Should a departure or spin occur, recovery time is significantly
increased.

The aircraft is fully controllable below 30 units AOA with lateral asymmetry
equivalent to one full external wing tank. Above 30 units AOA, lateral
asymmetry is the most significant factor contributing to departure
susceptibility.

OPS-2 D-14


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_21.jpeg:
Dash 1 restrictions are designed to keep lateral asymmetry under 5000 ft-lbs,
thereby keeping the aircraft resistant to departures and spins. Lateral
asymmetry over 5000 ft-lbs significantly increases susceptibility to
departures/spins. Extreme susceptibility occurs at 7000 ft-lbs.

Single Engine Operation

Due to the way the engines are mounted, the high thrust output of the
engines, and flight control mechanization, single engine operation does not
produce significant yaw/sideslip if conditions permit operating below MIL
power on the good engine. If afterburner is required (e.g., high gross weight
and/or high air temperature), sideslip becomes quite noticeable (especially
with -229 engines).

F-15Es equipped with -229 engines may experience a departure characterized
by rapid uncommanded sideslip, should an asymmetric thrust condition be
encountered at high speeds and power setting. The Asymmetric Thrust
Departure Prevention System (ATDPS) is designed to provide protection
against such an occurrence.

During normal cruise and recovery operations, there are no special control
problems associated with single engine operation. The most significant
handling problem is flight control transients, which degrade aircraft handling
characteristics caused by cycling hydraulic switchover valves. To prevent
switchover valve cycling, avoid stabilized flight where engine windmilling
conditions produce hydraulic pressure fluctuations between 800 and 2000 psi.
In addition, at high gross weights the ability to climb or accelerate is severely
degraded.

No Flap Landing

The no-flap landing configuration presents no particular handling problem.
The aircraft is slightly more pitch sensitive than with the flaps down, and
total drag is reduced. The pitch attitude for a given AOA is noticeably higher
than with the flaps down. These combine to make a precise spot landing
slightly more difficult.

Turbulence
At lower gross weight and wing loadings, the F-15E exhibits a bumpy ride in

turbulent air. This should not cause significant flight path variation, but
may be uncomfortable.

D-15 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_22.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. What four limits form the flight envelope?

pe op

2. An aircraft can be limited to an AOA, which is less than stall AOA due to
control authority limits or a handling qualities limit.

a. True
b. False

3. Best loiter AOA for the F-15E is approximately units.

a. 7.9

b. 8.5

c. 18

d. 16-22

4. As stability is increased, maneuverability is

5. Transonic dig-in causes an over G in the F-15E if even moderate
maneuvering is attempted when decelerating through Mach 1.

a. True
b. False

OPS-2 D-16


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_23.jpeg:
ANSWERS

a. airspeed
b. Mach
c. thrust
d. AOA
a

c
decreased
b

OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_24.jpeg:
ADVERSE FLIGHT CHARACTERISTICS

Even though the F-15E flight control system alleviates many of the more
undesirable characteristics of a swept wing fighter, the characteristics are
there and can cause grief under certain conditions. Adverse yaw, stalls,
departures, coupling, autorolls, spins and inadvertent nose high/nose low
situations can all occur and need some discussion.

Adverse Yaw

Sideslip produced by roll control deflection is known as adverse yaw. Effects
of this sideslip can vary from barely noticeable to spectacular. Adverse yaw
varies with AOA and is strongest at high AOA.

Cause - Deflection of ailerons effectively changes a wing’s shape, AOA and lift
vector orientation. These changes affect drag as well as lift and produce
yawing moments.

Cues/Recognition - Sideslip created by adverse yaw displaces the ball of the
turn and slip indicator, if displayed. The crew members may also feel
themselves being pushed laterally in the cockpit. Reduced roll rates, roll
hesitation or roll reversal may occur at higher AOA.

Prevention/Recovery - The solution to adverse yaw is to use rudder to
coordinate all turns and “keep the ball centered.” Fortunately, the F-15E
flight control system does this for you. The mechanical flight control system
washes out aileron deflection at high AOA (with the gear up) to reduce
adverse yaw, and the ARI blends in rudder to overcome any sideslip
produced. If operating with a degraded AFCS, (roll CAS OFF, or pitch or roll
ratio EMERG), use manual rudder to coordinate turns. Limiting AOA also
reduces adverse yaw. With the gear down, ailerons are not washed out and
adverse yaw is more pronounced.

Stalls

In the purest sense, stall occurs after C,, MAX is exceeded. Beyond

C,, MAX, further increases in AOA reduce C,; however, available stabilator
authority does not permit reaching actual C,, MAX in the F-15E. In practice,
there are several definitions for stall, but all are based on some maximum
useful lift coefficient.

OPS-2 D-18


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_25.jpeg:
One G Stall

This stall occurs when the extreme of useful C,, is achieved in unaccelerated
flight. In the F-15E, the wing is not fully stalled in this situation.

Cause - Maximum AOA at full aft stick is achieved. C, MAX for the aircraft
is not achieved, but AOA cannot be increased using the stick. There is not
enough thrust to overcome the drag in this situation, so the aircraft goes
downhill.

Cues / Recognition - This stall has no spectacular cues. In a 1 G stall, the
stick is against the aft stop; the AOA is stabilized at 38 units or above. Light
buffet begins at approximately 15 units AOA, increases in intensity until

23 units and then remains fairly constant. Buffet begins earlier and is
somewhat more intense with external stores aboard. Small roll/yaw
oscillations are present. The aircraft is sinking; roll/yaw response is almost
nonexistent.

Prevention / Recovery - If in a 1 G stall, neutralize lateral control inputs and
ease the stick forward to reduce AOA. Add power, if available, to speed up

the recovery.

Accelerated Stall

In this stall, once again, the wing does not exceed its maximum lift potential.
However, airframe buffet is heavy and moderate yaw and roll oscillations
occur. Drag is high and the energy state and flying characteristics quickly
approach the 1 G condition.

Cause - High AOA induces flow separation, and the turbulent air impinging
on parts of the airframe causes buffet.

Cues / Recognition - The key indicators for this stall are the heavy airframe
buffet and moderate roll/yaw oscillations. There is also a very rapid energy
bleed off rate. Buffet and yaw/roll oscillations diminish with airspeed
reduction. Turn rate essentially goes to zero.

Prevention / Recovery - Prevention is just a matter of awareness and smooth

control inputs. Recovery is accomplished by releasing back pressure until the
buffet eases.

D-19 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_26.jpeg:
Negative G Stall

This stall is similar to the positive G case, but with negative AOA.
Cause - Maximum negative AOA at full forward stick is attained.

Cues / Recognition - AOA is pegged at zero with the stick against the forward
stop. Since 0 is the minimum indication on the AOA gauge, AOA is pegged
long before the stick reaches the forward stop. Your body is pushed towards
the canopy, you have tears in your eyes and you can taste your last meal.

Prevention / Recovery - Most people have a natural tendency to avoid this
condition, and judicious use of forward stick prevents a stall. If “in the

straps,” positive aft stick is required to generate a positive AOA.

Landing Configuration Stall

This is essentially the same case as the one G stall. However, since full
aileron travel is available at any fore or aft stick position, care must be taken
to avoid adverse yaw caused by aileron input. With external stores, buffet
onset is at a lower AOA and buffet level increases.

Out of Control/Departure
Before discussing the causes, recognition and recovery techniques for out of
control and departure situations, the distinction between the two must be

clearly understood.

Out of Control

The aircraft is out of control if it is not properly responding to flight control
inputs.

Departure

A departure is characterized by an uncommanded change in the aircraft’s
flight path such as a nose slice, roll away from lateral input or excessive yaw
rate. In the F-15E, a departure is normally accompanied by the yaw rate
warning tone. The yaw rate warning tone should be treated as an indication
of the need for immediate initiation of the out of control recovery and not as
an indication of max performance.

OPS-2 D - 20


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_27.jpeg:
Cause - Yawing moments are present that exceed the aircraft and flight
control system capabilities to restore stability.

There are several potential causes of departure in the F-15E. These include
asymmetric thrust, flying with lateral asymmetries or inappropriate
maneuvering at low AOA.

Asymmetric Thrust Departure Prevention

Asymmetric thrust is a potential problem only for F-15Es configured with
PW F100-229 engines. In the event of an ATDPS failure above 500 KCAS or
1.1 Mach, the aircraft is subject to departure. Likewise, intentional
asymmetric throttle inputs in this flight regime can also lead to departure.

To prevent departures due to asymmetric thrust, do not make asymmetric
throttle inputs above 500 KCAS/1.1 Mach. In the event of an ATDPS failure,
remain below this speed regime. For those flying Strike Eagles configured
with PW F-100-220 engines, the problems will not be encountered throughout
the flight envelope.

Lateral Asymmetry Departure Prevention

While it may be intuitively obvious that an asymmetrically loaded F-15E
would be more susceptible to departure, Strike Eagle crews may find
themselves going to combat with just such a configuration. Mission tasking,
multiple targets, and mixed loads may occasionally result in asymmetric
aircraft configurations.

Nevertheless, application of Dash 1 procedures should prevent these
departures. Limit maneuvering to below 30 AOA when asymmetrically
configured, and avoid inappropriate low AOA control inputs. Keeping the
AOA below 30 units under these circumstances is easy to do.

Inappropriate Control Inputs at Low AOA

The most likely cause of F-15E departures is the misapplication of flight
control inputs at low angles of attack (below 30 AOA). As with the F-15A-D,
the Strike Eagle is subject to low AOA departures resulting from improper
stick and rudder inputs. The Dash 1 emphasizes the fact that the aircraft is
capable of generating very high pitch and roll rates at low AOA. Inertial and
kinematic coupling during high pitch and roll rates can lead to both high yaw
rates and large AOA and sideslip angle excursions. Laterally asymmetric
loads, centerline fuel tank and LANTIRN pods can aggravate such
excursions. If these factors alone are not sufficient to make Strike Eagle

D-21 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_28.jpeg:
drivers take notice, higher airspeeds can aggravate the situation even
further.

According to the Dash 1, “low AOA maneuvers, which are particularly
departure prone, include abrupt lateral stick or full rudder pedal inputs
below 25 CPU or abrupt or full cross-control inputs below 30 CPU. At any
AOA, abrupt longitudinal stick inputs should be avoided while the aircraft is
already rolling rapidly.” Furthermore, rolling or slicing departures may be
encountered even in level flight if attempting “...high sideslip maneuvers with
extensive cross-control inputs (lateral stick opposite rudder) ...and such
departures are more likely to be encountered with external fuel tanks and/or
LANTIRN pods installed.”

So, how do Strike Eagle drivers prevent such departures? There is an easy
answer-follow the Dash 1 guidance. When maneuvering the aircraft at lower
AOA (below 30 CPU), abrupt lateral stick/full rudder inputs and abrupt
cross-control inputs are not effective means of flying the Strike Eagle, and
these inputs can easily lead to low AOA departures.

Coupled Motion

Coupled motion is defined as motion in one axis caused by motion in another
axis. For example, rolling with rudder is coupled motion; a yaw or directional
input causes a sideslip that, in turn, causes the aircraft to roll. Pulling the
stick aft and establishing a pullup is an example of noncoupled motion. The
term roll coupling is often heard because rolling motions readily couple with
the yaw and pitch axes of modern fighter aircraft.

Cause - The actual cause of coupling in a given circumstance may not be
readily apparent to the pilot and there may be more than one cause. The
coupling mechanism may be aerodynamic, kinematic or inertial.

Cues/Recognition - Unfortunately, coupling is usually only recognizable after
the fact: accelerations were higher than anticipated, G or AOA got away from
the pilot or the aircraft departed. In modern aircraft, including the F-15E,
coupling as a result of rolling (roll coupling) is a concern; so when
uncommanded sideslip or AOA starts to build during a roll, coupling is
usually the case.

OPS-2 D - 22


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_29.jpeg:
Prevention/Recovery - You cannot totally avoid coupling, nor should you want
to. A rudder roll is an example of controlled coupling. However, unbridled
coupling can lead to loss of control and even aircraft disintegration. If roll
velocities are controlled in terms of rate and duration, coupling generally does
not cause a real problem. However, avoid large, abrupt control inputs in two
axes at once.

Also avoid trying to generate a very high roll rate when large AOA or yaw
rates already exist. If you detect coupling before it reaches catastrophic
proportions, smoothly neutralize the controls and allow the natural stability
to recover the aircraft.

As a general rule, if a roll is started using the rudders, stop it by using the
rudders. This helps prevent inadvertent coupling, autorolls and spins.

Autorolls

An autoroll is a sustained roll/yaw motion occurring after control
neutralization, and is viewed in the cockpit primarily as roll. The wing is not
stalled during an autoroll.

Cause - An autoroll is an example of coupled motion. A large sideslip angle
created by the pilot with rudder at high AOA starts the aircraft rolling
because of aerodynamic coupling. The stick is then moved forward, which
drives up the roll rate. The roll rate builds so fast that inertial coupling
prevents AOA and yaw/sideslip angles from being reduced. Hence the
autoroll continues, sustained by any residual rudder that may be present.
Without residual rudder, the roll eventually stops, if the aircraft CG is not
abnormally far forward.

Cues/Recognition - An autoroll can be recognized by roll acceleration as the
stick is moved forward during a rudder roll. The AOA stays at 20-30 units.
Yaw rate may or may not be high enough to actuate the departure tone.
Airspeed is normally between 200 and 350 knots.

Prevention/Recovery - The autoroll can be prevented by judicious use of
rudder at very high AOA, and by using smooth stick movements during any
rudder maneuvering. If an autoroll is encountered, neutralize the controls
and smoothly feed in opposite rudder to stop the roll. When the roll rate
decreases, the AOA breaks and the nose pitches down. The severity of the
negative G pitch-over is a function of the rate of recovery and is worse if pitch
CAS is off. An abrupt application of rudder may cause a negative G pitch-
over of up to four negative Gs. If in a negative G autoroll, neutral controls
will recover the aircraft.

D - 23 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_3.jpeg:
OPERATIONS

@}
a CO

oo
1 tt) yy deo 0

COVER

AIRCRAFT HANDLING CHARACTERISTICS (AHC

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with the terms,
fundamentals and applications of F-15K handling characteristics.

CONTENTS:

INT RODLIC TION sc anes sue ans sxc nese ans conte ante accn asus news certs axe ase eu ans mis ae mesa wate GE A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........000eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeseeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eecccccceessseecceesseeeecessseeeceessseeeecesssseeeseeessaeeeseessaeeeseeeeaaeeseeea D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oui eeccccesseeeesneeeeesaeecssanecessaeesesaeesssneeeesaees E-1
GLOSSARY. ieee eeccceeseeesscecssneeecesaeeceseecessaeeceseecessaeesesaaeeeesaeeeesnaeeeseas F-1

A-1 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_30.jpeg:
Spins

The F-15E is extremely resistant to departure at high angles of attack (above
30 cpu). Even so, flight control malfunctions at high AOA or large lateral
asymmetries make it possible to depart and spin the jet. A spin is a sustained
roll/yaw motion, which is viewed, in the cockpit, primarily as yaw. The wing
is stalled during a spin. The spin is probably the premier example of coupled
motion.

Cause - Progression from a departure to a spin is most likely if neutralization
of controls is delayed, lateral stick is held against the roll/yaw and/or lateral
asymmetry is present. Most, but not all spins exceed the 60°/second yaw
rate, with AOA pegged (over 45 units) and extremely low airspeed. Also, the
turn needle will be steady and fully deflected in the direction of the spin.

If engines are left in afterburner during a spin, they are more likely to
stagnate than during normal flight. Reduce power to military if in
afterburner.

Cues/Recognition/Recovery Characteristics - If the AOA is pegged and the
departure tone is on, the aircraft may be in, or about to enter, a spin. If the
yaw rate is more or less constant at 60-135°/second (45°/second inverted), and
if you are being pushed forward in the seat, the aircraft almost certainly is in
a spin.

The flight control system has a Direct Electric Link (DEL) between the FCC
and the stab actuators that is active during the normal CAS-off period in spin
conditions. In the DEL mode, the FCC essentially controls the stab actuators
with full, no-feedback authority in harmony with the lateral stick command if
the aircrew moves the control stick in the same direction as indicated by the
Spin Recovery Display (SRD). There is no DEL command in the pro-spin
direction. The warning in the Dash 1 to reset the pitch and roll CAS is to
ensure the DEL mode has engaged. The CAS will probably remain
disengaged.

OPS-2 D - 24


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_31.jpeg:
To aid in spin recognition and recovery, the aircraft provides the aircrew with
a SRD. The system recognizes a spin condition when yaw rate exceeds
57°/second, or exceeds 41.5°/second and persists above 30°/second for greater
than 5 seconds. At that time, all MPD/MPCD displays are replaced by the
SRD (Figure D-6).

STICK
< LEFT

O45

omr-aAjtonro

OPS-02-06

Figure D - 6. Spin Recovery Display.

The display contains an arrow to show recommended direction of stick
movement, recommended throttle positions, angle of attack, calibrated
airspeed and radar altitude. In addition, the low altitude warning system
(LAWS) is changed from its present set altitude to actuate at 10,000 feet and
again at 5000 feet AGL. The SRD format stays active until:

1) PB #11 (Menu) is selected.

2) anew master mode is selected (only changes those displays
programmed through a master mode).

3) HOTAS is used to select a new programmed display.

4) four seconds after recovery and yaw rate decreases below 20°/second.

D-25 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_32.jpeg:
Spin types include:

Oscillatory Spin

e Average yaw rate: 60-90°/second
e Average AOA: 70-80 units (pegged)
e Typical oscillations: 20°/second yaw rate

To quickly recover and prevent a flat spin from developing, use aileron in the
direction of spin (turn needle). The flight control spin recovery mode assists
in spin recovery by allowing full aileron authority, regardless of longitudinal
stick position (if yaw rate exceeds 41.5° per second for five seconds). Neutral
controls alone normally recover the aircraft, but more slowly (2500-7000 feet
altitude loss), and may allow progression to a flat spin. Delaying recovery or
inadvertently applying pro-spin (opposite) controls can rapidly cause a flat
spin.

Flat Spin

@ Average yaw rate: 75-135°/second

@ Average AOA: 70-90 units (pegged)

@ Extreme (negative 3-4 G) “eyeballs out” forces - uncomfortable and
disorienting

@ Very little oscillation

To recover, use full aileron in the direction of rotation (turn needle). The yaw
rate reduction is smooth and quite slow, so it may not be apparent for some
time. To recover requires a minimum altitude loss of 3000-6000 feet, two to
four turns, and 10-20 seconds; however, there are documented recovery cases
with numbers well beyond these.

Neutral controls alone do not recover the aircraft. Pro-spin controls

accelerate yaw and delay recovery or cause the crew to initiate ejection
procedures (documented several times).

OPS-2 D - 26


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_33.jpeg:
Low Yaw Rate Spin

@ Encountered infrequently, most likely from a slowspeed entry

Mild oscillations

@ You may not get a SRD until more than 5 seconds at >30 degrees per
second yaw rate

@ Low yaw rate: approximately 45-60°/second (departure tone beep rate may
not be constant)

Full lateral stick in the direction of the spin normally recovers the aircraft
quickly. If the aircraft is in the low rate spin mode and is not recovering with
full anti-spin controls (especially with yaw rate gyro failure), landing gear
may be lowered to ensure full anti-spin aileron deflection. If for some reason
DEL has not engaged, do NOT extend flaps!

Delay in applying recovery controls (or applying pro-spin controls) can cause
a higher spin rate.

Inverted Spin

@ Normally entered from negative G stall (full lateral stick or rudder applied
at full forward stick)

@ Average yaw rate is low: 40-45°/second

@ Average AOA: minus 55-60 units (pegged off the low end)

@ No buffet or oscillations

Neutral controls recover aircraft in 1 to 1-1/2 turns, with approximately
4000 feet altitude loss.

If a very high rotation rate has developed before you begin recovery, it takes
quite a while before the yaw rate stops (10-20 seconds). If carrying a lot of
stores or an asymmetric load, the recovery takes even longer. Altitude
required to recover from a spin is difficult to predict. Typically, altitude loss
is 1500-2500 feet per turn and 1 to 7 turns are required to break the spin.
Remember that a dive recovery follows the spin recovery and 6000 feet is the
minimum execution altitude for ejection.

D-27 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_34.jpeg:
Inadvertent Nose High/Low Airspeed

This is not a serious condition in the F-15E unless the aircraft is close to the
ground.

Cause/Recognition - This condition is normally the result of inattention
during extreme vertical maneuvering. Lack of aircraft response to control
inputs is the first clue.

Prevention/Recovery - If, despite your best efforts, the aircraft ends up nose
high at very low airspeed, neutralize the controls, retard the engines out of
AB and wait for the aircraft to recover. The aircraft ends up pointed down
and airspeed increases. The ride may be somewhat uncomfortable as the
aircraft flips around, but the F-15E stabilizes fairly quickly if the pilot does
not fight it.

The aircraft unloads as speed approaches zero and one or more of the
following may happen:

@ Aircraft falls off forward, backward or to the side.

e@ CAS falls off the line due to yaw rate (master caution/flight control).
@ Oil pressure falls to zero during the unload (master caution/ engine).
@ ECS surges and Display Flow Low caution illuminates.

As the nose falls, the aircraft may roll (quickly) or nose may tuck. Maintain

neutral controls, not forward stick. Once nose is down and airspeed is
increasing, recover from the dive.

OPS-2 D - 28


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_35.jpeg:
Inadvertent Nose Low/High or Low Airspeed

If in a nose low situation and recovery before hitting the ground is
questionable, use the following emergency dive recovery procedures.

NOTE
Representative 40-45,000 lb and 65,000 lb GW charts are shown in

Figures D-7 and D-8. Refer to TO 1F-15E-1-1, page A9-33.

Immediately roll in the shortest direction to wings level, and then begin the
pull out based on airspeed and gross weight.

@ Below 350 KCAS: Speed brake in; Above 350 KCAS: Speed brake out
@ Below 350 KCAS at any gross weight: Select full A/B while
simultaneously applying full aft stick or 12 Gs to wing rock
e 350 - 500 KCAS:
e 40-45,000 lbs - Select idle while simultaneously applying full aft
stick or 10 Gs to wing rock
e 65,000 lbs - Select idle while simultaneously applying full aft stick or
8.7 Gs to wing rock
e Above 500 KCAS:
e 40-45,000 lbs - Select idle while simultaneously applying 8.0 Gs
e 65,000 lbs - Select idle while simultaneously applying 6.8 Gs

Approximate altitude loss will be as depicted in Figures D-7 and D-8.

D - 29 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_36.jpeg:
9 DIVE ANGLE AT
START OF PULL-OUT

7 90°

60°

ALTITUDE LOSS - 1000 FEET

30°

|

0
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
INITIAL AIRSPEED -KCAS OPS-02-07

Figure D - 7. Emergency Dive Recovery 65,000 lbs. CFTs + 4 AIM-7 + AIM-9.

9 DIVE ANGLE AT
3 START OF PULL-OUT
LL
8
© 6
2
O
60°
Ww 4
a |
Ee
F 3 sasarte cae
xt
1 ROCCE eee

0
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
INITIAL AIRSPEED -KCAS OPS-02-08

Figure D - 8. Emergency Dive Recovery 65,000 lbs CFTs + LANTIRN Pods +
12 MK-82 + 4 AIM-9.

OPS-2 D - 30


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_37.jpeg:
HANDLING QUALITIES WITH MALFUNCTIONS

You should now have some knowledge of handling characteristics and
phenomena as they apply to aircraft in general and the F-15E in particular.
You should also know how the F-15Es flight control system works and its
normal response throughout the flight envelope. You should spend some time
thinking about how failure of certain components of the AFCS affects
handling characteristics. The Dash 1 describes handling with various
portions of the mechanical flight control system and CAS inoperative. You
should read these descriptions in Section HI and VI of the Dash 1 if you have
not already done so.

The best way to relate aircraft handling characteristics to flight control
malfunctions is to recall the purpose of the various flight control features.

NOTE

If a flight control anomaly is apparent, but aircraft control is adequate,
do not disengage CAS since it may be responsible for maintaining

controlled flight.

CAS Off

With the CAS off (all axes) and pitch/roll ratios in AUTO, the aircraft feels
less solid. Stability augmentation and precise handling refinements are lost.

@ The aircraft is sensitive at high speed, and pilot-induced oscillations (PIO)
may occur. Because of this, operation with CAS off above 600 KCAS is
prohibited.

@ Higher stick forces are required at high G.

@ There is no added authority to compensate for external stores. Close
formation/AAR may be difficult with three external tanks.

@ Automatic trim is less effective.

@ CAS ARI is inoperative. Some manual rudder may be needed for
coordinated flight.

@ Aircraft may exhibit some wallowing and dutch roll tendencies.

D-31 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_38.jpeg:
Pitch/Roll Ratio EMERG

With the pitch and roll ratios in EMERG and the CAS on, the
hydromechanical system uses fixed midrange values, and the CAS must use
more of its available authority to give nearly normal handling characteristics.

@ There is no mechanical ARI.
@ Maximum stabilator deflection is reduced at low speed.
@ The greatest potential problem is if pitch CAS fails or is turned off.

CAS Off, Pitch Ratio EMERG

In this case, the pitch ratio goes to fixed midrange authority (.3 to .5). No
additional authority is available from CAS.

e@ Aircraft handling is significantly degraded.

@ High longitudinal stick forces are present at low speed.

@ The aircraft is very sensitive at high speed (600 knot limit).

@ There is no ARI available.

@ There is no automatic trim.

@ The maximum available AOA is approximately 21 units at touchdown
speed.

Perform a controllability check, if practical. Avoid high sink rates - fly
18-unit AOA on final.

CAS Off, Roll Ratio Emergency

Roll ratio goes to fixed midrange authority, and no additional authority is
available from CAS.

@ Reduced roll rates at all speeds.
@ High lateral stick forces are present.

@ No ARI.

Approach and landing are difficult in crosswind, turbulence, or with an
asymmetric load.

OPS-2 D - 32


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_39.jpeg:
FLIGHT LIMITATIONS

Limits that apply to the F-15K are contained in the Dash 1. In addition,
limits that apply to the aircrew are contained in Air Force and field level
regulations (AFI 11-206, AFI 11-214).

Speed Limits

The F-15E airspeed limit is never greater than 800 KCAS/2.5M and is
usually going to be less than that. Look at the aircraft configuration, consult
the Dash 1 and determine the most restrictive limit that applies. The actual
limit may vary with phase of flight.

Some of these limits can easily be exceeded (e.g., stores employment and
jettison limits), and it is the crew’s responsibility to keep things under control
(i.e., there are no speed warning cues except for some TF cautions on the
HUD).

G Limits

Due to engine considerations, negative Gs are limited to 7 seconds and
steady-state zero G is prohibited. The positive G limit and current G state
are presented on the HUD via the overload warning system. In order for this
system to compute properly, the crew must program the PACS correctly.
Even more importantly, stores limits are not included in OWS computation,
and some are easy to exceed.

CG Limits

For the clean aircraft, CG stays well inside the limits throughout the flight.
As internal fuel burns, the CG moves aft, and the aircraft becomes less stable
as the flight progresses. For a CFT configured aircraft, the CG moves
forward as CFT fuel is burned and then moves aft again as internal fuel
burns. CG limits require some thought when expendable stores are loaded.
Exceeding CG limits, particularly the aft limit, affects handling qualities.
These limits are even more important in the event of a CAS failure.

D - 33 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the F-15E flight envelope, normal flight characteristics and
limits, and the effects of exceeding those limits.

2. Identify the definitions, causes and recovery methods for the
following F-15K flight conditions:

Samo ase

Adverse yaw

Stalls

Autorolls

Spins

Out of control
Departure
Inadvertent nose high
Inadvertent nose low

3. Identify the adverse handling characteristics caused by:

a
b.
c

d

External stores

Single engine operation
No flap landing
Turbulence

4. Identify the effects of these flight control malfunctions on F-15E

handling:

a. CAS off

b.  Pitch/roll ratio LMERG

c. CAS off, pitch ratio EMERG
d. CAS off, roll ratio EMERG

OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_40.jpeg:
Roll Limits

The Dash 1 list is long. Most of these limitations were established to
minimize the effects of coupling and reduce the risk of departure and
structural overload. High roll rate, long duration situations are the ones
prohibited. These limits should not restrict normal air-to-air or air-to-ground
operations.

AOA Limits

For conditions that are not departure resistant, AOA is limited to 30 units.
These include:

@ Lateral asymmetry over 8000 ft-lbs without external tanks.

@ Lateral asymmetry over 5000 ft-lbs with any external tank(s).
With A/G stores or cargo pods loaded (except for SUU-20B/A on stations 2
and/or 8 with no other stores with a limit of 35 units).

Fuel in wing mounted external tanks.

Three external tanks loaded on the aircraft.

Landing gear down.

Split inlet ramps (one ramp locked full up and one ramp operating
normally).

CAS off or a continuously displayed HIGH AOA DGRD caution.
Tank 1 fuel transfer problem.

OPS-2 D - 34


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_41.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Adverse yaw is stronger at AOA.
a. high
b. low

Due to high drag associated with the accelerated stall, the characteristics
quickly approach

What is coupled motion?

During a sustained positive G autoroll, the AOA is typically ___ units.

a. O

b. 16-18
ce. 20-30
d. 40-45

The G limit for your specific external stores configuration is always as
displayed by the OWS on the HUD.

a. True
b. False

Half-way through a Hi to Low intercept, you realize you were disoriented,
and are now 90° nose down at 400 KCAS, passing 5000 feet AGL. How do
you recover, and what would be your minimum altitude loss, if you do
everything right? (Gross weight 44,000 lb)

D- 35 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_42.jpeg:
ANSWERS

2. those of the one G stall

3. Motion in one axis caused by motion in another axis.

6. Select IDLE/speed brake, pull 10 Gs to 850 KCAS, and then full AB and
full aft stick, or 12 Gs, if required, to wing rock. Altitude loss would be
about 4200 feet.

OPS-2 D - 36


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_43.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ
The Mach limit of the F-15E flight envelope is based on

engine thrust.
aerodynamic heating.
fuel pump capacity.
roll response.

po op

Adding external stores to the F-15E generally

a. makes the aircraft more susceptible to departure.
b. makes the aircraft less susceptible to departure.
c. does not influence aircraft susceptibility to departure.

An autoroll is by residual rudder.
a. caused

b. sustained

c. prevented

d. attenuated

Under positive G, if a spin is mistaken for an autoroll, rudder
opposite the roll will

a. prevent a recovery.
b. assure a speedy recovery.
c. have little effect.

With CAS off and pitch ratio in EMERG,

the maximum available G increases.

ARI and automatic trim are not available.

the aircraft is less sensitive at high speed.
longitudinal stick forces are lighter at low speed.

ao op

E-1 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_44.jpeg:
6. The AOA limit with air-to-ground stores loaded is____ units.

ao op

7. You have just entered the VFR traffic pattern (2500 feet MSL) when
a runway closure is announced. The runway is expected to be closed
for 10 minutes; you have about 15-20 minutes of fuel remaining and
cannot divert. You should

pe op

climb to FL 180 and hold at 18 units AOA.
maintain present altitude and hold at 18 units AOA.
climb to FL 180 and hold at 14 units AOA.
maintain present altitude and hold at 14 units AOA.

8. Coupled motion

a ©

OPS-2

is not a real consideration in modern aircraft such as the F-15E.
is a concern in the F-15E but is easy to detect.

is a concern in the F-15E and is rarely detected until after the
fact.

only occurs in the F-15E if two or more axes of the CAS fail.


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_45.jpeg:
AFCS
AOA
ATDPS
CAS
Cy

CG

DEL
LAWS
MAC

SRD

GLOSSARY
Automatic flight control system
Angle of attack
Asymmetric Thrust Departure Prevention System
Control augmentation system
Coefficient of drag
Center of gravity
Coefficient of lift
Direct Electric Link
Low altitude warning system
Mean aerodynamic cord

Spin recovery display

OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_5.jpeg:
5. Identify the F-15E limitations/prohibitions regarding the following:

a. airspeed

b. G

c. CG

d. Roll

e. AOA
REFERENCES
TO 1F-15E-1

Section II

Section III

Section V

Section VI

TAKEOFF through NO FLAP

LANDING

Pitch Ratio Failure
Out-of-Control Recovery
Single Engine Operation
Runaway Trim

Flight Control Malfunction
LAT STK LMT Caution
Controllability Check

Flap Malfunctions

Airspeed Limitations
Prohibited Maneuvers

CG Limitations

External Stores Limitations

All

OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_6.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
quiz.

2. Read the references in TO 1F-15E-1, Chapter 6.

OPS-2 C-1


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
THE FLIGHT ENVELOPE

The F-15E, like any other aircraft, is free to rove the entire atmosphere at
will, as long as you remain within the boundaries prescribed by stall, thrust
and airspeed. The limits of this G designed flight envelope are not hard
boundaries and can be penetrated, but not without some consequences.
Further, the limits of the envelope change with aircraft configuration. The
general level flight envelope is represented in Figure D-1.

DESIGN MACH LIMIT

THRUST LIMIT

AOA me \,

60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

TIME LIMITED ZONE

ALT - 1000 FT

DESIGN AIRSPEED LIMIT

0.2 04 06 08 1.0 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
MACH NO.

OPS-02-01

Figure D - 1. Flight Envelope.

The limits of the flight envelope are formed by airspeed (maximum dynamic
pressure) on the lower right, Mach (heating) on the upper right, engine thrust
on the top and angle of attack on the left. Knowledge of the limits of this
envelope is important to safely operate the F-15E.

D-1 OPS-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_8.jpeg:
Airspeed Limit

The lower right edge of the flight envelope is formed by a maximum allowable
calibrated airspeed. This limit is based on the structural strength of the
airframe and represents the maximum dynamic pressure (referred to as Q)
the aircraft can withstand without permanent deformation. This limitation
applies primarily at lower altitudes and becomes even more of a factor with
external stores loaded. Exceeding the limit may cause control problems due
to airframe twisting and eventually causes airframe damage.

Mach Limit

At high Mach numbers (above 2.0), aerodynamic heating becomes a
significant factor. Aluminum alloys rapidly lose strength at elevated
temperatures, effectively reducing the maximum dynamic pressure the
airframe can support. Thus, the Mach limit is an extension of the airspeed
limit.

Since airframe heating is not instantaneous, time-limited dashes are
permitted (e.g., 2.5M through 2.3M for one minute). In addition to airframe
limits, temperature inside intake ducts rises rapidly with increased Mach,
and engine front-face temperatures can become a problem. This limitation
exists at higher altitudes where high Mach flight is achievable. The penalty
for exceeding this limit is much the same as exceeding the airspeed limit.
Additionally, elevated temperatures in the inlet ducts affect engine life.

Thrust Limit

This limit represents the absolute altitude that can be achieved and level
flight maintained. (The max rate of climb, without losing airspeed, is zero.)
This limit is very sensitive to gross weight, drag and engine performance.

The limit is not terribly important in normal operations, but could be a factor
if operating single engine in mountainous terrain with a load of ordnance.
This limit can be exceeded with a zoom climb or when losing an engine at
altitude.

Generally, exceeding this limit causes no difficulty in itself; the result is that
the aircraft descends back into the envelope.

OPS-2 D-2


Text from OPS-2_AHC_page_9.jpeg:
Angle of Attack (AOA) Limit

The left edge of the flight envelope equates to the maximum usable lift
characteristics of the aircraft. At lower speeds, C,, MAX is normally the limit.
At higher speeds, buffet or undesirable handling characteristics become the
limit.

AOA limitations are an operational factor at all altitudes, airspeeds and
configurations. These limitations effectively determine how well the pilot is
able to alter/control the flight path. Exceeding AOA limitations results in
decreased performance, stall and/or departure from controlled flight. AOA is
the key to performance and is the parameter of most concern when we talk
about “max performing” the aircraft. In fact, AOA is the dominant factor
even when operating well inside the envelope.

Performance within the Envelope

The two primary controls are the stick and throttles, which control AOA and
thrust. For most operations, the pilot controls AOA with the stick and the
amount of thrust selected by the throttles. The pilot generally thinks in
terms of controlling attitude and airspeed, but it is AOA (and its associated
lift and drag coefficients) that determines performance.

F-15E Cockpit AOA Displays

An indication of AOA appears constantly in the front cockpit on the AOA
gauge, which displays AOA in arbitrary units from 0 to 45. AOA is also
displayed on the HUD and the ADI at all times. Although there is an AOA
indication on the HUD, it is important to learn to estimate AOA by aircraft
response and “feel.”

D-3 OPS-2


