Text from AVI-8_INS_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AVIONICS
AVI-8
INERTIAL NAVIGATION SYSTEM (INS)

JANUARY 1999

(Suite 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_10.jpeg:
Ring Laser Gyro

Each RLG is a strapdown system (it does not move). It is a triangular
enclosure pictured in Figure D-2.

Within each RLG, two counter rotating laser beams are reflected around
the triangle using mirrors. When the gyro is at rest, the two beams have
the same frequency showing no acceleration. When the aircraft turns, one
beam has a longer path to travel; the other, a shorter. This causes
changes in the laser light frequencies which are detected by photocells.
The output of the photocells is used to determine angular rate and
direction of rotation used for attitude and navigation computations.

AVI-8

DETECTOR

CORNER PRISM

MIRRORS (3)

LASER
DISCHARGE

AVI-08-02

Figure D - 2. Ring Laser Gyro.


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_11.jpeg:
Inertial Navigation Digital Computer

The digital computer uses RLG outputs, along with inputs from
mechanical accelerometers, to calculate accelerations in pitch, roll, and
yaw. It also calculates true heading and magnetic heading vectors. In
addition, the computer provides BITs, computer mode control, and
information to other systems.

The INS’ digital computer has a defense mapping agency (DMA) magnetic
variation look-up table included in its memory. Based on present position,
the INS can determine magnetic variation for any location on earth. This
allows it to output magnetic heading without external inputs, other than a
good starting present position. A Kalman filter is used to provide
enhanced alignment and performance. This is a software program that
keeps track of earth movement, the cycle of mechanical error, past FNU
INS performance, alignment quality, time in the NAV mode, type of
update, and other factors. How much of a position update the filter
accepts is based on known earth rotation values and mechanical error
calculation.

D-5 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_12.jpeg:
INS Mode Knob

The INS mode knob is on the sensor control panel (Figure D-3) located on
the left FCP console. It is used to select the INS modes listed below.

TF RDR RDR ALT RADAR
ON © OVERRIDE STBY

OFF. ON xq
PULL
STBY ON y
EMERG
OFF F °

AVI-08-03

Figure D - 3. Sensor Control Panel.

OFF - removes power from the INS

STORE - initiates a stored heading alignment
GC - initiates a gyrocompass alignment

NAV .- is the primary navigation mode

AVI-8 D-6


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_13.jpeg:
ALIGNMENT (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

There are three modes of alignment: gyrocompass, stored heading, and
in-flight. All that is required during most missions is turning the INS
knob to GC shortly after the engines are started and to NAV prior to
takeoff. Let us look at the process a little closer to understand what the
system is doing.

Two basic things happen in the time between turning the INS on and
switching to NAV. For the first 30 seconds of an alignment, the system
determines attitude/platform stabilization. The remaining time is used to
determine true north. This whole process is called aligning the INS.

Gyrocompass (GC) Alignment (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

A gyrocompass alignment is the most accurate alignment and the one
most often used. Accuracy specifications call for drift of 0.8 nm per hour
but flight tests have resulted in a calculated error of 0.37 nm per hour.

GC Alignment - Procedure (INS Mode Switch OFF to GC)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, INS Procedures, INS Alignments, Normal GC
Alignment for a complete discussion of GC alignment procedures.

In short, turn the INS control knob to the GC position and insert a present

position through the UFC. Stabilization and true north are established by
the system. After that, select NAV and take off.

D-7 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_14.jpeg:
Alignment Status In The HUD

The status of the INS alignment is displayed above the NAV data block in
the HUD (Figure D-4). During a normal GC alignment, these are the
anticipated indications (provided a present position entry is not needed):

GC NO TAXI
NAV 1A

N 12.0
OFF

AVI-08-04

Figure D - 4. INS Status During Alignment.

GC NOTAXI Indicates a GC coarse alignment has begun. During
this phase, the INS is computing its attitude. The
message lasts for approximately 60 seconds. DO NOT
MOVE THE AIRCRAFT. If movement is detected, the
alignment ceases and the INS must be turned off (at
least 2 seconds) and then restart the alignment.

GC 15.9 An alignment quality number appears on the HUD
display after the INS calculates a level aircraft
attitude. This number represents the relative time of
the alignment where 15.9 = beginning value and
0.8 = nearly complete.

AVI-8 D-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_15.jpeg:
GC

GC

HOLD

OK

The aircraft can be moved without degrading INS
accuracy after the alignment quality number appears.
However, when the aircraft is moved or when the
holding brake is disengaged, the message GC HOLD
replaces the alignment quality number as a visual cue
that the alignment has ceased. After the aircraft is
stopped, you must engage the holding brake in order to
continue the alignment. This is commonly referred to
as an interrupted alignment.

As the alignment continues, the quality number counts
down. Once GC 0.8 is displayed, the alignment is
nearing completion. Shortly GC OK will appear. This
indicates that the alignment has reached its specified
tolerances. The INS mode switch can now be moved to
NAV. If NAV is selected prior to the GC OK
indication, INS performance will be degraded. If NAV
is not selected when GC OK appears in the HUD, the
INS will continue refining its alignment and Kalman
filter values.

Interrupted Alignments

By disengaging the holding brake after GC 15.9 is displayed but before GC
OK is displayed, then reengaging it on different aircraft headings, you
help the INS electronically determine true north and true vertical more
accurately. Once GC OK is displayed, no more interrupted aligning is
possible. This is not to be confused with an extended alignment.

D-9 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_16.jpeg:
Extended Alignments

Whenever GC OK is displayed and the holding brake is engaged, the INS
is in an “extended alignment.” This will not degrade the INS accuracy; in
fact, it will improve it by refining values through the Kalman filter
software program. Therefore, selecting INS NAV should be delayed as
long as practical on the ground, and the holding brake should be engaged
every time the aircraft is stopped. Also, INS drift occurs whenever the
holding brake is disengaged and/or the INS is placed in NAV, which is
another good reason to delay these actions.

Present Position Required (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

If the last aircraft shutdown present position differs from the last
alignment present position by more than 2 nm, GC PP REQ is displayed
instead of GC NO TAXI. This shows that the INS needs the current
latitude and longitude. The information must be entered before the
alignment will continue. The new present position needs to be accurate.
If an incorrect latitude is entered, the INS will detect the wrong earth
rotation rate which will cause PP REQ to be displayed. An incorrect
longitude cannot be detected. If you enter it incorrectly, simply type in
the correct coordinates and the INS will continue its alignment, although
it will backstep in the alignment process somewhat. In the FCP, the PP
keeping submenu is displayed automatically on the UFC. In the RCP, the
PP keeping submenu must be selected by pressing PB #4 on the Menu 2
display. Either crew member can input present position, but it is
normally done by the WSO. Read the Dash 1, Section II, UFC Procedures,
Data Entry/Display (Both), Present Position for a complete discussion of
present position entry procedures. For best results, an accurate present
position should be entered on every flight, even if PP REQ is not
displayed.

AVI-8 D-10


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_17.jpeg:
Stored Heading (SH) Alignment (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

A valid stored heading alignment is possible only if a GC alignment was
previously accomplished, the INS control knob was not placed in NAV,
and the aircraft was not moved since the last INS shutdown. The SH
alignment has the same accuracy as the previous GC alignment but only
requires about 40 seconds to complete. True north is electronically stored
so the INS only needs to stabilize and check its accuracy before it is ready
for use. If the present position information is not accurate, the
groundspeed of the previous flight was >3 knots or the error rate of the
previous flight was >1 nm/hr, the INS automatically performs a GC
alignment regardless of the INS knob position.

Stored Heading Alignment - Procedure (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, INS Procedures, INS Alignments, SH
Alignment for a discussion of SH alignment procedures. Place the INS
knob from OFF to SH. The alignment status is displayed in the HUD.
The expected sequence is as follows:

SH NO TAXI Like GC NO TAXI, it means do not move the
aircraft.
SH 0.8 The system already knows where north is, so only

a check for accuracy and fine corrections are
necessary. The alignment time number starts at
0.8.

SH OK Put the INS mode knob in NAV.

In-flight Alignment (IFA)

IFAs are performed in the unlikely case of an in-flight failure of the INS.

It is a GC alignment done en route in an attempt to recover the INS.
Read the Dash 1, Section III, INS Failure.

D-11 AVL-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_18.jpeg:
DATA ENTRY

You must provide the CC with the coordinates of a point before you can
obtain NAV information. The data is actually stored in the CC and the
calculations are done there. Let us refer to CC and INS interface as “the
system.”

NOTE: Elevation is not required for lateral steering information;
however, it should be entered with each point in the event that an altitude
update is accomplished at any of the sequence points. In order to cue
sensors (A/G radar, TGT IR) accurately, elevation is required.

Sequence Points

For navigation, sequence points are
used to define the route of flight. A
sequence point is a general term
given to five types of route points
that can be entered into the system:
base, steer points, aim points,
target points, and offset points.
Up to three separate routes may be
entered and selected using A, B and
C route identifiers. The letters A, B,
or C are typed after the navigation
point number when entering/
requesting information on a different
route from that currently selected.

The system can store 100 steer
and/or target points using different
letter and number syntax to define
these points. An additional 100 aim
and/or target offsets can be stored
using specific letter and number
syntaxes.

4.A AVI-08-05

Figure D - 5. Sample Route.
AVI-8 D-12


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_19.jpeg:
Navigation/steering provided in the HUD, ADI, HSI, TSD, A/A radar, A/G
radar, TEWS, UFC, etc., is based on these entries. Automatic sequencing
of these points is provided as the route progresses as long as the aircraft
passes within two nm of the point (with AUTO SEQ selected on the HSI).
For the following description of points (Figure D-5), assume route A is
selected.

Base Point

The present position used by the INS during alignment becomes the base
point. Base is the start and end point for each route (A, B, C). On the
TSD and A/G radar display, the base looks like a baseball home plate with
the letter B above it.

NOTE

If a base point is loaded in the MC/DTM, to ensure the INS entered
present position at alignment is the base point (rather than the MC/DTM
base point), the MC/DTM must be read prior to entering the PP;
otherwise, the base point loaded through the MC/DTM is used.

Steer Point

Steer points are route turn points and make up the basic route to be
flown. They are displayed on the A/G radar and TSD as circles and are
represented as whole numbers (i.e., 1A).

Aim Point

Aim points are associated with steer points or initial points (maximum of
seven per steer point). Normally, they are visual, radar, or IR significant
and help identify the steer point. An aim point is depicted on the TSD and
A/G radar as a segmented circle with its associated steer point number, a
decimal, and number 1-7 (i.e., 1.1A). An aim point associated with an
initial point is shown as a segmented square (i.e., 2.1A).

D-13 AVL8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AVI-8, July, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AVI-8_INS_page_20.jpeg:
Initial Point

An initial point is the last steer point before a target. It is displayed as a
solid square and a whole number (i.e., 2A).

Target Point

Targets are the point of attack. They are displayed as triangles with a
whole number and a decimal point (i.e., 3.A).

Target Offset Point

Offset points are always associated with targets (up to seven per target).
Just like aim points are used to identify steer points, offset points are used
to help identify a target. Offset points are displayed as segmented
triangles with the target’s number, a decimal, and 01-07 (i.e., 4.01A).

Steer points and target points are stored together. Their combined total
may not exceed 100 points. Aim points and target offset points are stored
together and their combined total cannot exceed 100. The total system
maximum is 200 points.

Mark Point

Mark points are reference points which can be entered to “mark” a
particular location for future use. They can only be created by marking
your present position (overfly mark) using the UFC keypad MARK button
or by marking a position using the A/G radar or the TGT IR. Up to 10
mark points can be stored in the CC. “Marks” above the 10 erase previous
mark points to make room for new mark points. They are displayed on
the TSD and A/G radar as » (where X = 1 through 10). Some types of
A/G weapons deliveries also create mark points. Mark points are called
up for steering or UFC display by entering M followed by the mark point
number. The time the mark point was created and its coordinates are
available on the UFC point data submenu.

AVI-8 D-14


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_21.jpeg:
Bullseye Point

Bullseye points are identified by BEX, where X is 1-10. They are created
in the CC by MC/DTM, list point, or manual entry. They are displayed
visually as . Bullseye points are called up on the UFC by entering B (or
BE) and the number. They are used to determine the aircraft position
and/or the position of a sensor cue relative to the bullseye point. Bullseye
information is displayed on the A/G radar, A/A radar, and the TSD.

Avoidance Points

Avoidance points are displayed as a circle on the TSD to delineate areas
that have been designated “no fly” for whatever reason. The UFC entry is
“A” and a number (1-15). These points can be entered by MC/DTM, by list
points, or manually. The radius of the avoidance circle is entered/
displayed on the UFC point data submenu (.99 to 99.0 nm). The AFMSS
can be used to load avoidance points in the DTD planning MC/DTM load
routine.

D-15 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_22.jpeg:
Entry Methods

There are three ways to enter sequence point information into the CC.

Mission Cartridge/Data Transfer Module (MC/DTM)

The easiest method to enter data is viaa MC/DTM. The crew programs
the specifics of the mission into the MC/DTM through the AFMSS and
takes it to the jet. After engine start, the MC/DTM is read into the system
(actually, the CC). Route information is now programmed and it only
needs to be checked for accuracy.

Standard MC/DTM

The next method of entering data is a standard MC/DTM. This is an
AFMSS preprogrammed MC/DTM that has selected list points around the
local area but not a specific route. After engine start, the MC/DTM is
read. Since there is no programmed route, you must define one.

List Point

Reading the MC/DTM puts a list of geographic points (LAT, LONG, and
elevation) into the CC. Generally, the flying organization selects points
that are commonly used as standard list points. Rather than type in the
coordinates of points, use the list point number to define a route. By
selecting a steer, target, aim, or offset point and associating it with a list
point, a route is created using predefined geographic points. There are no
procedures in the Dash 1 for this process.

AVI-8 D-16


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_23.jpeg:
a{LAuU 12888" STR 19.8

TON 11eX RIP NAY

TIFF 12 3 RITEOFF

(j4TR I9R LIST 37) Lf]

€ 4 nerss st ToT ssa8 )LF Z
MENU 1 DISPLAY fee eceLce MEA SOO) LL

 SIDIDIO]!

©

(| OTT ELV 465" )]

@ ®
LJs 33°28 STR 19.A Jk
S| [im | AL LP UFC POINT DATA SUBMENU
J 458 THE TeeTTS |b
7am
CY Tees. 125 Ueee. 0o¥ LO

DATA 1 DISPLAY

AVI-08-06

Figure D - 6. UFC Point Data Submenu.

1. To match list point data with a sequence point, select the sequence
point to be defined. (See Figure D-6, UFC point data submenu,
PB #1.)

2. Type the number of the list point into the scratchpad. (The Aircrew
Aid contains Wing list points and descriptions.)

3. Enter it by pressing PB #10 on the point data submenu.

The list point number, its coordinates, and elevation appear in the point
data submenu. The selected list point defines the sequence point
identified at PB #1. Note that this method does not enter information
concerning minimum en route altitude (MEA) or time over target (TOT).
Enter them manually if required/desired.

D-17 AVL8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_24.jpeg:
Manual Entry

The last method for entering data is to manually enter everything through
the UFC. Manual entry of latitude and longitude is covered in the Dash 1
and in the CBT lesson. The coordinates are typed into the scratchpad and
entered into their appropriate display windows on the UFC point data
submenu.

After navigation information is entered, it should be checked for accuracy.
The easiest technique is to step through the TSD to ensure the points
appear correctly positioned on the map. Once verified, the route is ready
to fly. Additional methods for verifying route information are addressed
in a later lesson.

IN FLIGHT
Taking Off in GC

If you inadvertently takeoff with the INS in GC, do not panic. As long as
GC OK appeared in the HUD before brake release, there should be little

or no degradation in navigation accuracy. There is no apparent problem

changing the switch from GC to NAV while the aircraft is moving.

Auto Sequencing

If AUTO SEQ is selected (boxed) on the HSI, the system automatically
sequences the current steer point to the next steer point under most
conditions. You must pass within two nautical miles of a steer point to get
the system to auto sequence. However, auto sequencing does not take
place when a base, a mark point, or a bullseye point is the selected steer
point. If AUTO SEQ is not selected (unboxed) on the HSI, the system
must be manually sequenced. Other exceptions are addressed in A/G
lessons.

Manual Sequencing
If the system does not automatically sequence to the next steer point,

select it manually. Do this by typing the next steer point number into the
scratchpad and entering it at PB #10 on Data 1 or Menu 1 of the UFC.

AVI-8 D-18


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_25.jpeg:
Position Updates (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Although the “system” is extremely accurate, a small amount of drift
exists. You will normally perform position updates to the MN, but the
INS can be updated, as well.

In Suite 3, with the UFC update select submenu, three update methods
are available: the HUD, overfly, and altitude updates. From the update
select menu (Figure D-7), choose the option you intend to use and a
specific submenu appears (Figure D-8, left). EGI updates will be available
after TCTO 1F-15E-737.

(® ®)
YS IMN PP RST OFLY ]
~ ) 4/995 ALT ROT HUB )

Uced 388

pe CAT

AVI-08-07

UPDATE SELECT SUBMENU

Figure D - 7. Position Update.

D-19 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_26.jpeg:
HUD Updates (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, Update Procedures, HUD Update for the
HUD update procedures. In short, be in the NAV or INST master mode;
access the HUD update submenu (Figure D-8, left). Take command of the
HUD (depress/release and toggle forward with the FCP castle switch and
select INS or MN at PB #10). Ensure the steer point is selected, then use
the FCP target designator control (TDC) to slew the line of sight (LOS)
cue to the ground reference (Figure D-8, right). Push in on the TDC, then
slew the LOS cue.

@ @ LINE OF SIGHT CUE
(J[stR 156A mn} EC)
(jJa|N 2582 UPBT MENU ral
q (Ja {u e200 SP)
‘at HUB ENTER|L()
J Od (be2bies U228.108 Gx LO ie
sks 1S JK

®
areOrs a0 ; 2 IC lF4 rae re
: NAV 16A

=>
IM w M 5 i N 4.4
©HHOOL© tothe
BRT : | ; | 4 S a] - =
M 10.-— —~110
N @ |a/ Phil] cr 3 WfraralliiiMenu] @ ||P EMIS / iy \\

HUD UPDATE SUBMENU HUD AVI-08-08

Figure D - 8. HUD Update.

Deltas

The distances (N or S/E or W) from the INS (or MN) PP to the update
derived position (shown under the LOS cue) is shown on the UFC at

PBs #2 and #8 as feet (or miles measured to the nearest tenth if greater
than 3000 feet) N/S and E/W. They are referred to as deltas. Accept the
deltas (and correct the error) by pressing PB #7 (ENTER); reject the deltas
by exiting the submenu or doing another update.

AVI-8 D - 20


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_27.jpeg:
NOTE

The displayed steer point is inhibited from auto sequencing until the
aircrew exits the UFC update menu. This applies to all UFC update
routines.

Overfly Freeze Update (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, Update Procedures, Overfly Freeze Update,
for update procedures. To perform an overfly freeze, ensure the steer
point is selected and visually fly over the update point. At the moment
you pass overhead, press FREEZE. Assess the deltas to ensure they are
reasonable. To accept the update, press PB #7 (ENTER); to reject, exit the
display. Overfly updates also update “system altitude” if the radar
altimeter is operational and an elevation of the displayed steer point is
present. As in the HUD update, ensure MN or INS is the selected update
source.

Altitude Update (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, Update Procedures, Altitude Update, for the
update procedure. The altitude the aircraft computes is known as “system
altitude” (SYSB - system baro) and can be updated over a specific
sequence point, or over a surface elevation. Access the altitude update
submenu, select the method of update, freeze, and accept or reject the
delta. Although altitude updates do not apply directly to the INS, it is an
update you will do on every air-to-ground mission. A further discussion of
system altitude update implications will be provided during the surface
attack academic block.

Radar/IR Updates

It is also possible to update the INS/MN position using the TGT IR and/or
the air-to-ground radar. These topics are covered in specific lessons later
in the course.

D-21 AVL-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_28.jpeg:
After Landing Overfly Freeze (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

After taxiing back to a known position (parking spot, arming area spot,
etc.), an overfly update of the INS must be performed to enter the
mission’s INS data. This is how a history of the INS performance is
maintained by the central computer. Doing an overfly freeze update after
landing does not significantly improve INS performance on future flights,
but it does develop a history for maintenance troubleshooting.

Considerations for INS/MN Updates

1. A position update to the INS updates the MN, as well. A position
update to the MN does not update the INS.

2. If during the UFC-accessed updates, either crew member leaves the
UFC update format displayed, the steering will not auto sequence to

the next point.

3. If an update is to be performed to the INS, INS must be selected as
the PP-keeping source (or INV will likely be displayed for deltas).

AVI-8 D - 22


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_29.jpeg:
INS MALFUNCTIONS
Excessive Ground Speed/Position Errors

After selecting NAV, you should look at your ground speed and present
position prior to takeoff. Ground speed errors greater than 6 kts and
position errors greater than 2 nm are excessive. Lesser values should be
considered excessive for air-to-ground missions. Attempt another
alignment by going to off for 5 seconds then back to GC align. Allow the
INS to remain in GC align as long as possible. Monitor ground speed and
present position to assess system accuracy for one minute after selecting
NAV again.

Backup Systems (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Although an INS failure seriously degrades mission capability, backup
systems easily permit safe recovery of the aircraft. The INS is backed up
by the attitude heading reference system (AHRS) for attitude and
magnetic heading information. The mission navigator (MN), a subroutine
of the central computer, keeps its own constant present position, and is
used for sensor positioning and weapons release data. In addition to these
backup systems, an in-flight alignment can be performed; and, if
maintained for 20 minutes, the INS may reflect original alignment
accuracy. Realize that an insidious failure could cause a position error
leading to an off course situation or missed target or TOT. All systems
must be continually cross-checked against others.

D - 23 AVL8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_3.jpeg:
AVIONICS

COVER

INERTIAL NAVIGATION SYSTEM (INS

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with the F-15E ring laser
gyro inertial navigation system. It provides the information necessary to
use the F-15E INS efficiently and safely. As part of a computer-based
training (CBT) lesson, this workbook should be read prior to taking the
CBT instruction.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0000. eeecccesnceceeseeceseeeessaeecssaeecessaeeessaesensaeesesaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeseeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.000. eeeeeeeeeee C-1
CEE os ses sans sos cores nos nas ois cua cares canis ans as RSA SNS Onis aU KUNE kK NewS SHES KoRKG MU NaS HSS aUD KR D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ ou. eeecccessneecesseeecesaeesesaeeessaeeesssaeesesanesenaees N/A
(ina) F-1
ANNEX ooo eecceccesnceeesseeecnsceeessaeecesaeeesssaeesesaaeeessaeecessaeesssaeesessaeeesseeeeeas G-1


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_30.jpeg:
The INS is extremely reliable, but you must recognize certain
malfunctions and be alert to the following indications. Normal displays
are shown in Figure D-9, degraded displays are shown in Figure D-10 and
Figure D-11.

TON 112X R 14B M
305 / 15.0
00:02:20

Ww TCN ILST GT
YS L_]

NAV 14B

N 12.0
00:01:48 E

AVI-08-09

Figure D - 9. Normal Displays.

AVI-8 D - 24


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_31.jpeg:
General Indications of INS Failure (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

If the INS fails completely, the MASTER CAUTION light illuminates and
ATTITUDE appears as an MPD/MPCD caution. The AV BIT caution light
illuminates and INS will be displayed in the BIT display failure window.
The system should automatically switch over to the air data (A/D) mode
and use AHRS attitude and heading information along with UFC entered
winds and magnetic variation to compute present position and steering
cues in the MN. The ATTITUDE caution only comes on for a major failure
of the INS (or AHRS). Indications of a partial failure appears in other
locations. If the built-in test (BIT) function detects a failure in the INS,
INS appears on the BIT display (MPD/MPCD) in the equipment failure
window, and the AV BIT light comes on.

5
STR 14B
305 /15.0 105 /12.0
00:02:20 E 00:01:48 E

BEFORE
TO IF-15E-737

NAV DEGD

NAV 14B
N 12.0
00:01:48 E

AFTER EITHER AUTOMATIC OR

MANUAL SWITCHING TO AHRS AVI-08-10

Figure D - 10. INS Failure.

D - 25 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_32.jpeg:
HUD Indications of INS Failure (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

If the INS fails completely and the system successfully switches over to
the AHRS, one indication in the HUD is a blinking (one hertz rate)
velocity vector. NAV DEGD is displayed in the navigation information
block. If INS heading and/or velocity information is in error, the velocity
vector may also blink. If both the AHRS and INS have failed (or the
attitude/heading reference selected on the ADI is invalid), the heading
scale indicates OFF and the pitch ladder disappears. All NAV data blocks
display OFF. Current G will be supplied by the flight control
accelerometers, but OWS max allowable G will be OFF. The velocity
vector will disappear as will the bank indices (Figure D-11).

ADI Indications of INS Failure (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

The attitude information for the aircraft automatically changes to AHRS
and the only indication on the ADI is that INS is replaced by AHRS at
PB #5. If you cycle PB #5 back to INS, the ADI displays a break X across
the attitude ball and INS OFF appears at PB #5 (attitude source
indication). Heading information will still come from the AHRS, if it is
operational. IF both INS and AHRS fail, the ADI displays a break X and
the heading scale displays OFF, no matter which system is selected.

AVI-8 D - 26


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_33.jpeg:
¢
24
A TON 112x

OFF / 15.0
OFF E

R
12 c
D

15 *
STR4B oy
OFF / OFF
OFF E

Ss
1

GT ILSN AD
A

BEFORE
TO IF-15E-737

NAV DEGD
NAV 14B
N OFF
OFF E
AVI-08-11
Figure D - 11. INS/AHRS Failure.
AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_34.jpeg:
HSI Indications of INS Failure (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

If the INS fails completely with the AHRS operational, and the system
switches to the A/D mode, all HSI indications will appear to be normal,
but will be supplied through the air data navigation mode. If only INS
heading information is bad, HSI heading will be supplied by the AHRS. If
both INS and AHRS have failed, OFF appears in the NAV data block and
TCN data block. The NAV pointer disappears. The compass card slaves
to north and freezes, and the lubber line, heading marker, and captain's
bars disappear. The TACAN pointer will show relative bearing only, just
like ADF. TACAN DME will also be available, but OFF will be displayed
in the bearing block.

In-Flight Alignment (IFA) (Before TCTO 1F-15E-737)

Read the Dash 1, Section II, INS Failure, INS In-Flight Alignment for a
discussion of in-flight alignment procedures. Although INS failure is
unlikely, it is possible. If the INS fails while airborne, an in-flight
alignment may be required. It is extremely critical that you precondition
the AHRS and mission navigator. The AHRS must have good heading
and attitude information and the A/D system have a good present position
before starting the IFA, or alignment time will be increased significantly.
A full IFA requires 20 minutes and three to five high accuracy position
updates. Precision velocity updates (PVUs) are accomplished by using the
A/G radar, and position updates by using the targeting IR, A/G radar,
HUD, or overfly. It is best to leave the A/G radar in IFA as long as
possible to supply ground speed and drift angle (PVU) information.

AVI-8 D - 28


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_35.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
What are the three components of the FNU INS and their functions?
a.
b.
c.
What are the two methods of aligning on the ground?
a.

b.

Write a brief description of the FNU INS mode selector knob
positions.

a. OFF -

b. STORE -
ce. GC-

d. NAV-

Write a brief description of the alignment status messages that
appear in the HUD above the NAV data block.

a. GC/SH NO TAXI -
b. GC PP REQD -

e GC15.9/SH 08 -
d. GCHOLD-

e. GC/SH OK -

What are the procedures for a GC alignment?

Boop

D - 29 AVL8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_36.jpeg:
6. What are the procedures for a stored alignment? (including setup)

ao op

AVI-8 D - 30


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_37.jpeg:
oS

Boop

Ro op

ANSWERS

The FNU mount is installed in the aircraft and holds everything
in place.

The FNU battery provides power during brief power
interruptions.

The FNU INS contains the inertial navigation digital computer
and three complete RLGs, plus three analog accelerometers

Gyrocompass alignment
Stored heading alignment

removes power from the INS
initiates a stored heading alignment
initiates a gyrocompass alignment
is the primary navigation mode

Indicates a GC/SH alignment has begun. During this phase, the
INS is computing its attitude. The message lasts for
approximately 60 seconds. DO NOT MOVE THE AIRCRAFT.
This message displays if the present position is not OK. PP
must be entered for the NAV alignment to continue.

An alignment quality number represents the relative time of the
alignment. 15.9 = beginning value; 0.8 = nearly complete.

The aircraft is moved after the alignment quality number
appeared. If the aircraft is stopped but the parking brake is not
engaged, the INS will not reenter the alignment mode.

This indicates the alignment is complete and the INS mode
switch may be moved to NAV.

INS mode knob to GC.

Input new PP if required.

Wait for GC OK.

INS mode knob to NAV before takeoff.

Start with a good GC alignment (aircraft not moved since the
last INS shutdown).

INS mode knob from OFF to STORE

Wait for SH OK.

INS mode knob to NAV.

D-31 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_38.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AVI-8 D - 32


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_39.jpeg:
A/A
A/D
A/G
ADF
ADI
ADP
AFCS
AFMSS
AHRS
ALN
ALT
AV

BIT
CBT
CC
CEP
DEGRD
DMA

DME

EADI

GLOSSARY
Air-to-air
Air data
Air-to-ground
Automatic direction finding
Attitude director indicator
Air data processor
Automatic flight control system
Air Force Mission Support System
Attitude heading reference system
Align
Altitude
Avionics
Built-in test
Computer-based training
Central computer
Circular error probability
Degrade
Defense mapping agency
Distance measuring equipment

East

Electronic attitude direction indicator


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Perform gyrocompass (GC) and stored heading (SH) alignments,
enter present position on the UFC PP keeping submenu as required.

2. Identify the operational characteristics of the fighter navigation unit
(FNU) INS to include gyrocompass and stored heading alignments,
and UFC point data submenu data entry.

3. Transfer list point data to a sequence point utilizing the UFC point
data submenu.

4. Select sequence points and steering information for display on the
HUD, HSI, and ADI.

5. Perform HUD, overfly, and altitude updates.
6. Identify indications of and corrective actions for FNU INS failure.

7. Identify the steps necessary for a proper FNU INS shutdown.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1 Section I Upfront Controls, Data 1 Display,
Menu 1 Display, Menu 2
Display, Head-Up Display
(Windows 16, 17, 18, and 19),
Navigation Displays, Inertial
Navigation System

Section IT Before Taxiing/Engine Shutdown;
(INS Procedures)

Section III GROUND OPERATION: INS

Problems; In-flight INS
Failure

AVI-8 B-1


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_40.jpeg:
EGI
EHSI
FCP
FNU
fps
GC

GPS

HRM
HSI
HUD
IBIT
IFA
IMA
INS
INST
INV
IR
kts
LANTIRN

LAT

AVI-8

Embedded global positioning inertial navigation system
Electronic horizontal situation indicator
Front cockpit

Fighter navigational unit

Feet per second

Gyrocompass

Global positioning system

Horizontal

Hour

High resolution map

Horizontal situation indicator

Head-up display

Initiated built-in test

In-flight alignment

In motion alignment

Inertial navigation system

Instrument

Invalid

Infrared

Knots

Low altitude navigation and targeting infrared for night

Latitude


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_41.jpeg:
LONG
LOS
LRU
MC/DT™.
MEA
MN
MPCD

MPD

NAV
nm
OFLY
OFP
OWS
PB
PBIT
PP
PPKS
PPS
PVC
PVU

RCP

Longitude

Line of sight

Line replaceable unit

Mission cartridge data transfer module
Minimum en route altitude
Mission navigator
Multipurpose color display
Multipurpose display

North

Navigation

Nautical miles

Overfly

Operational flight program
Overload warning system
Pushbutton

Power up built-in test

Present position

Present position keeping source
Precise positioning service
Precision velocity consistency filter
Precision velocity update

Rear cockpit

F-3 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_42.jpeg:
RLG

RST

RTC

SH

SPS

SYSB

SYSG

SRU

TACAN

TEWS

TGT

TOD

TODB

TOT

TSD

UFC

Vv

VOR

VORTAC

WwW

WGS

WSO
AVI-8

Ring laser gyro

Reset

Real time clock

South

Stored heading

Standard positioning service
System baro altitude

System GPS altitude

Shop replaceable unit

Tactical air navigation

Tactical electronic warfare system
Target

Time of day

Time of day buffer

Time on target

Tactical situation display

Upfront control

Vertical

VHF omni range

VHF omni range tactical navigaiton
West

World geodetic system

Weapon system officer

F-4


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_43.jpeg:
ANNEX

Embedded Global Positioning Inertial Navigation System (EGD)

With TCTO 1F-15E-737, a system called the embedded global positioning
inertial navigation system (EGI) replaces the AHRS. The Suite 3 software
recognizes the presence of the EGI and will not display or address AHRS
functions. The EGI provides a more reliable and maintainable source of
attitude and heading information than the AHRS. The EGI will be your
primary source of position and velocity information when it is selected as a
present position keeping source (PPKS), and can provide a full backup for
INS information in the event of an INS failure. The INS will be your
primary navigation source under normal circumstances.

The EGI is very easy to use. Power is automatically applied to the system
when the aircraft is started. It automatically transitions to its align mode
and then to its NAV mode when it is ready.

Global Positioning System (GPS)

GPS is a space-based positioning and time system. Twenty-one navstar
satellites are circling the earth in six orbits. They are positioned 10,000
miles in space and have 12-hour orbits. They are distributed so that at
least four satellites will be in view anywhere on the earth at any given
time. The time system includes coordinated universal time (Zulu time)
available to the user for satellite acquisition.

The GPS network was designed to support a broad segment of users. The
two levels of service developed are the precise positioning service (PPS)
and the standard positioning service (SPS). The PPS system is primarily
for military use and has a higher attainable degree of accuracy than the
SPS.

The GPS uses world geodetic system 1984 (WGS 84) absolute earth
coordinates rather than a ground-based transmitter. As a result, GPS isa
positioning system rather than a navigation system such as TACAN.
Positioning is provided in three dimensions to include vertical
information.

G-1 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_44.jpeg:
The GPS navstar satellites broadcast L-band phase modulated radio
waves. Each satellite transmits its own unique signal enabling the EGI to
tell individual satellites apart. On-board data processors within the EGI
measure the signal and solve a position and time problem to determine
your position.

Weather does not affect the GPS satellite, which was designed to be
serviceable even in a combat environment. The GPS satellite
constellation is in place and has been in use for several years. The USAF

intends to integrate GPS in all aircraft in an effort to eventually replace
TACAN, VOR, and VORTAC systems.

Fighter Navigation Unit (FNU) INS/EGI

The FNU INS is still the primary source of attitude and magnetic heading
information. It provides a backup source of present positioning
information. The EGI will provide the primary source for present
position, velocity, and attitude information. Though the EGI effectively
eliminates the need for the TACAN, the TACAN is still available for
navigation. The EGI replaces the AHRS and integrates GPS data into
existing on-board systems.

Mission Navigator (MN)

The MN is always based on the FNU INS. MN resets will align the MN to
the current FNU INS position. The aircrew can update the MN without
updating the FNU INS.

Best available velocity is based on the present position keeping source
(PPKS). In EGI PPKS, the best available velocity is the position velocity
consistency (PVC) filter velocity. In MN or INS PPKS, the best velocity is
based on INS velocity. The radar will use the best available velocity for
HRM and position keeping.

GPS Almanac

The first time a GPS receiver is operated, it must begin a search for
satellite signals. A GPS constellation almanac providing position and
approximate time facilitates this search. Almanac data gives orbit
parameters for each satellite and may be valid for periods up to 180 days.
The almanac data is used to predict satellite visibility and range, thereby
narrowing the GPS receiver search window.

AVI-8 G-2


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_45.jpeg:
Once the first satellite is acquired, a current almanac can be obtained
from the satellite’s NAV message. It takes up to 12’ minutes to collect
complete almanac data which can be obtained from any GPS satellite.

The AFMSS adds a GPS data almanac to the CC initialization
subdirectory. Only stored almanac data is provided by AFMSS on the
MC/DTM. The MC/DTM is read to the CC and is available to the EGI
during initialization. Current almanac data changes weekly and is
written to the MC/DTM on a postflight write. When the postflight
MC/DTM is installed in AFMSS for debriefing, AFMSS is automatically
updated.

The EGI stores almanac data if it maintains good battery function. Ifthe
battery fails, MC/DTM almanac data is required. If that data is not the
current week’s almanac, the EGI will replace it with almanac data
acquired from the satellite. Satellite acquisition is fairly rapid but can
take up to 30 minutes if almanac data is more than a week old. Almanac
currency directly affects acquisition time.

EGI

The EGI is a navigation platform that combines an inertial sensor
assembly with a GPS receiver and a Kalman filter.

The EGI inertial sensor assembly is combined with inertial electronics to
process gyro and accelerometer information for computing north/south/
east/west; vertical velocities and acceleration; X/Y/Z axis velocities and
accelerations; and pitch, roll, magnetic heading, and time heading. It
contains circuits for calculating inertial altitude, latitude, longitude, and
computer signals for gyro compass and stored heading alignments.

The EGI GPS receiver processes signals from space-based satellites by
tracking them to accurately measure aircraft position, velocity, and time
to aid in aircraft positioning. The more accurate data provided by the EGI
enhances navigation, sensor cueing, target acquisition, and weapons
delivery.

A Kalman filter is added to accurately model and weigh errors in velocity,
position, and calibration for enhanced performance.

G-3 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_46.jpeg:
The EGI’s inertial sensor, GPS receiver, and Kalman filter are combined
to calculate a blended EGI solution for present position, velocity, and
altitude. Three or more satellites are required for the best EGI blended
solution.

EGI Alignment

The EGI is automatically powered up when the aircraft generators come
on-line. There are no published aircrew procedures required for EGI
alignment.

The EGI alignment modes are as follows:

GC align 4 minutes - requires PP from CC or FNU INS. The PP
stored in the FNU INS is sent to the EGI when FNU
INS is placed in GC.

SH align 30 seconds - this requires a full EGI GC alignment

prior to shutting down the EGI from the previous
flight and the aircraft heading not changed prior to
next power up

In motion align aircraft is in motion during align. Must be
(IMA) tracking satellites and may take up to 10 minutes

to complete.

EGI Shutdown

An orderly shutdown is required for optimum performance. The CC issues
the EGI an off command when the FNU INS is turned off after flight.

This assumes the aircraft exceeded 80 kts, went from weight on wheels to
weight off wheels, and back to weight on wheels. A FNU INS overfly
update is then performed prior to shutting off the INS. The EGI stores
the performance monitor data and initialization data for the next power
up. This takes about 10 seconds. The EGI then begins a GC alignment.
Completion of the GC alignment is not required unless a SH alignment is
desired.

AVI-8 G-4


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_47.jpeg:
EGI Performance Monitor

The EGI performance monitor keeps a history of recent alignments and
navigation data. This is stored on the basis of completed flights. This
history requires:

@ airspeed greater than 80 kts

e EGI in NAV mode for 30 minutes

e EGI receives FNU INS overfly update at the end of the flight

e FNU INS turned off

This data is stored in nonvolatile memory if you allow 30 seconds from
FNU INS shutdown to the time engines are shut down.

EGI GC Alignment

The GC alignment is the most accurate alignment mode. It takes four
minutes from the time both generators come on-line to complete the
alignment. The alignment requires a present position (PP) input to the
EGI from the CC or GPS. The CC initially sends a PP stored in the FNU
INS at power up and again if a PP is entered into the FNU INS from the
UFC. If the EGI keys are verified and the GPS is tracking four satellites,
the EGI will take the PP from the GPS. This will then replace the entered
PP.

EGI Stored Heading (SH)

The EGI stored heading mode is a fast alignment mode. It takes 30
seconds to complete and does not require a PP entry. To perform a SH
alignment, a full EGI GC alignment must have been completed prior to
last shutdown and the aircraft heading should not have been moved more
than 1°. Once the EGI has been set up for a SH alignment, it will
continue to do so on each power up until the aircraft has moved, or a PP is
entered that is more than 900 feet from current PP.

G-5 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_48.jpeg:
EGI IMA

If the aircraft moves or goes weight off wheels during alignment, the EGI
will do an IMA. This can take up to 10 minutes and may require
assistance from the GPS. A heading change during the first few minutes
of an IMA may speed up the alignment.

“Y” Code

The military precise positioning service (PPS) is accessible with the EGI.
PPS is enhanced by an encrypted mode referred to as “Y” code. An
encryption key is installed in the EGI using a KYK-13 at a specialized
crypto fill port in the EGI LRU.

The CC commands the EGI to use the “Y” code. If the EGI does not track
a “Y” code for more than a 5 minute period or the EGI is unkeyed, the CC
will command the EGI to stop using GPS in the blended solution. An
additional option, NON Y code, will become available and can be selected
on the detail page. EGI* will be displayed in the BIT fault window along
with an AV BIT light to alert the crew to this situation.

Boxing NON Y on the detail page will allow the crew to use GPS in the
blended solution with noncoded signals. If “Y” code again becomes
available, the GPS will track “Y” code satellites with no aircrew action.
The NON Y display will be removed from the detail page when this
happens. If the NON Y display should reappear, reboxing is all that is
required to use noncoded GPS signals again.

Time of Day (TOD)

Not to be confused with Have Quick TOD, the EGI uses a TOD in Zulu
time to aid in satellite tracking and aircraft positioning. If the EGI has
had a battery change, TOD time and date must be entered to decrease
satellite acquisition time.

TOD date entries are made via the UFC HUD title page at PB #1. The

date is entered as M1-1 through M12-31 for month and day entries. If the
month is unchanged, M1 through M31 is required to change the day entry.

AVI-8 G-6


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_49.jpeg:
Zulu time entries are made via the UFC Data 1 at PB #8. The Zulu time
is entered as M000000 through M235959. All six digits must be entered.

Upon power up or CC reset with weight on wheels, the time of day buffer
(TODB) and real time clocks (RTCs) are initialized to GPS time if GPS
time is valid. If GPS time is not valid, the TODB is initialized to RTC. If
GPS time should then become valid before an aircrew time entry, the GPS
time will initialize the TODB and RTC.

If GPS time should become valid after aircrew entry, GPS time will be
loaded to the TODB and RTC but will not change the crew-entered CC
time.

Initializing the TODB and RTC with GPS time sets them to Zulu time.
Your position from the satellite is based on time of arrival ranging.
Synchronization between the GPS time and on-board TODB and RTC
times are essential. A comparison is made from the time a signal is sent
to when the EGI receives it. This time difference will give the range to the
tracked satellite. With four satellites, very accurate positioning can be
determined.

Blended GPS/INS

The EGI is a separate entity from the FNU INS and operates differently
in its aircraft positioning solution. The EGI combines GPS and inertial
sensor information to build a blended solution. The EGI blended solution
uses GPS satellite range measurement and inertial sensor measurement
to provide an EGI blended horizontal position, velocity, and altitude.
Position accuracy is 30 feet circular error of probability (CEP) and velocity
accuracy of 0.34 fps.

The EGI blended solution is always used within the EGI even when GPS
is unavailable for some reason. If GPS aiding is lost for short periods, the
Kalman filter for the EGI is adjusted to reduce inertial sensor errors. This
will be more accurate than a free inertial-only solution. However, if GPS
aiding is absent for more than 30 minutes, the EGI solution will generally
contain larger errors than the FNU INS solution. The EGI solution
cannot be updated in position or velocity to correct errors as you can with
the FNU INS.

G-7 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE THE CBTS CLASS
1. Study the information contained in this workbook.

2. Read references in Sections I, II, and III of TO 1F-15E-1.

C-1 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_50.jpeg:
Present Position Keeping Source (PPKS)

The PPKS options available are EGI, MN, and INS. The air data
processor (ADP) source is retained as default PPKS but is not selectable.
The PPKS defaults to INS at start up and must be changed by the aircrew
(Table G-1). The EGI is the recommended PPKS and should be selected
as PPKS when the EGI and FNU INS have completed their respective GC
alignments.

BGI
M INS
INS

Table G- 1. PPKS Default Structure.

The system altitude source is coupled to the PPKS selection. SYSG is the
EGI blended altitude combined with the blended vertical velocity by the
PVC filter. SYSB is the temperature-corrected baro altitude.

UFC PPKS Submenu Selection

The PPKS submenu is accessed from UFC Menu 2 by selecting PP XXX at

PB #4. PB #4 shows actual PPKS in use prior to going to the submenu
(Figure G-1).

@

®

@)

a lJVC OFF STR 13.A s|PP-KEGI «* EGI

LJ

ie

(a (6CUS ON UPDIMENU | EL ai§ 2 P46. 123" 38°
(J4filS 189.78 BE 7] We YB3°45.345" ce"

PP-REGL KEGI* 1234

MVE 18.18" HUD TITLE

e
‘0
=
O
O

Ol elt

_| (Usa ees use eee) |

T Ololol

MENU 2 PPKS SUBMENU
AVI-08-12

Figure G - 1.

AVI-8 G-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_51.jpeg:
Selection of PPKS is made at PB #10 on the PPKS submenu (Figure G-1).
The possible selections are EGI, INS, and MN, with INS as the power up
default. The actual PPKS is displayed at PB #1 on the submenu

(Figure G-1).

When EGI is the PPKS, the keying and GPS aiding status is displayed at
PB #1. The leading “K” means the EGI is keyed and keys are verified.
When a trailing asterisk (*) is present, the blended solution is being
improved with GPS information. The asterisk (*) will not be displayed if
the EGI is tracking less than four satellites for more than five minutes or
if the horizontal position error is greater than 120 feet for more than five
minutes (PB #8, Figure G-1). At PB #8 and #9 (Figure G-1), horizontal
(H) and vertical (V) position errors are displayed. If the EGI is in an align
mode or invalid, INV will be displayed rather than the errors. In all other
PPKS (INS/MN) PB #8 and #9 will be blank.

If the EGI is in NAV mode, the blended estimated spherical position error
will be displayed at PB #7 on Menu 2 (Figure G-1). If EGI is in align
mode, ALN will be placed in the PB #7 data block. If the EGI is off or
invalid, INV will be displayed at PB #7.

EGI Updates

The UFC update menu has been modified to delete TACAN as a position
update source. EGI replaces TACAN at PB #7 (Figure G-2). MN PP RST
will reset MN position to FNU INS unless FNU INS is invalid. If this is
the case, a MN RST cannot be done.

System altitude resets are coupled with the PPKS and are referred to as
SYSG (EGI) and SYSB (INS/MN). SYS ALT reset at PB #2 will display
SYSGXXXX or SYSBXXXxX for five seconds if reset occurred. Only the
system altitude in use will be reset. INV will be displayed for five seconds
if the reset did not occur.

G-9 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_52.jpeg:
SiN PP RST GFLY

S (_|(65S ALT RST HUD

(|| UebS 288 U348 B88

GOlelojolo 4

UPDATE MENU

AVI-08-13

Figure G - 2.

€ Isr UPDT MENU ) Le F)
Jer on

TI ItH 58°3 EG! ENTER | Ly
(|| Uebs 208 U348 B88 an

AVI-08-14

AVI-8 G-10


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_53.jpeg:
EGI Position Updates

The EGI cannot be updated in position or velocity. The EGI does not
provide data to the FNU INS or MN in a periodic aided fashion.

To update the FNU INS, INS must be selected as the PPKS. The update
is a Kalman weighed update. When the FNU INS is updated, the MN is
also updated (Figure G-3).

The MN position can be updated in any PPKS and will accept 100% of the
update.

The EGI UFC update menu is used to perform a one-shot position update
from the EGI to the FNU INS or MN.

PB #2 and #8 will display N/S/E/W errors between FNU INS/MN and the
EGI. PB #4 can be toggled to provide an altitude update. If the field at
PB #4 is blank, only a position update in latitude and longitude will be
accomplished. The FNU INS must be the PPKS in order to update the
INS position.

Velocity Updates

MN and FNU INS PVUs can be performed in any PPKS. The EGI
velocity, however, is never used to update the FNU INS or MN velocities.

In EGI PPKS, the CC will send a velocity correction to the radar. The
velocity correction is the difference between EGI velocities and reference
velocities. The reference velocity source can only be FNU INS or ADP.

PVUs are not required prior to constructing HRM patch maps if in EGI
PPKS. If MN is the PPKS, it is still recommended to do a PVU before
making a HRM patch map.

Altitude Updates

SYSG cannot be updated from any source. If in EGI PPKS, altitude
updates are not allowed. Altitude updates from overfly update or the
targeting pod will be allowed in any PPKS; however, only SYSB will be
updated. After takeoff, if SYSB altitude is in error an update is preferable
to areset. Corruption of SYSB is really the only reason to consider an
altitude update.

G-11 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_54.jpeg:
Malfunctions

The FNU INS provides primary altitude and/or magnetic heading to the
EHSI, EADI, and the HUD. The EGI is the backup source for magnetic
heading to the EHSI, EADI, and HUD if the FNU INS should fail. If the
FNU INS fails, the EGI will provide altitude source information to the
EADI and HUD.

If the EGI is the PPKS (i.e., KEGI) with a FNU INS failure, the EGI will
drive the now flashing velocity vector. If any other PPKS is selected, the
ADP will drive the velocity vector if airspeed exceeds 80 kts.

The attitude source can be toggled between INS and EGI on the EADI.
The INS is the default mode. The EGI will be the default in case of FNU
INS failure. If the EGI is in an align mode or invalid, a break X will
appear on the EADI and OFF will be displayed in place of EGI at PB #5.

If the EGI keys are unverified after 20 minutes (indicated by EGI* in the
BIT fault window and KEY IN PROGRESS on the EGI detail page),
NON Y should be available and selected. Key verification may take an
additional 15 minutes.

Air Data (A/D) Mode Malfunction

The A/D mode is a backup to the FNU INS navigation mode. If the INS
should fail, the CC automatically switches to the A/D mode. The CC uses
true airspeed, wind velocity, and EGI heading to determine position and
compute steering information. The A/D is not manually selectable. You

may accomplish PVUs to update velocities. The most accurate position
updates are EGI, HRM, LANTIRN, and OFLY.

AVI-8 G-12


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_55.jpeg:
FNU INS In-flight Alignment (IFA)

Turn the INS knob to OFF then directly to NAV and select IFA on the A/G
PVU display. The FNU INS enters IFA mode and receives attitude and
heading from the EGI. Initial position and velocity are PPKS dependent.
EGI should be the PPKS selection.

In the HUD window you should see IFA 15.9 rather than INS DEGRD,
and a countdown begins. Limit maneuvering to +45° pitch and +60° of roll
during the IFA. You should accomplish three to five position updates
using overfly and LANTIRN as the preferred methods. In 20 minutes you
should see IFA OK in the HUD. To stop the IFA, deselect IFA anytime
after IFA 15.9 is displayed.

Built-in Test (BIT)

The EGI, like other avionics systems, has a BIT system to provide
information pertaining to the EGI operating status. The three BIT
routines are power up, continuous, and ground initiated.

The EGI power up BIT (PBIT) is automatically initiated at aircraft power
up. If the system or components fail during the BIT, EGI* will be
displayed in the BIT fault window and an AV BIT light will be displayed
(Figure G-4). This is also the indication that nonkeyed NON Y is
available on the EGI detail page (Figure G-4).

(7 AUTO MAINT DETAIL SFDR \\
DSPL NO
pee BUILT-IN TEST Tews BUILT-IN TEST

EGIL A1 AS AT

RDR SFDR 5A SFDR 5B KEY - XXXXXXXXXX BATTERY FAIL

DMS 5B__EGI* 2 HOUR ALERT ELEC BST REQUIRED

MAIN BIT DISPLAY EGI DETAIL BIT DISPLAY

AVI-08-15

Figure G - 4.

G-13 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_56.jpeg:
Pressing EGI on the BIT 2 display initiates the EGI ground initiated BIT
(IBIT). This BIT can only be accomplished with weight on wheels. If the
aircraft becomes airborne or weight off wheels is sensed, the IBIT will
automatically terminate (Figure G-5).

ialalIels

(A AUTO MAINT DETAIL M/4 \
CAUT

DSBL
Eat BUILT-IN TEST

RDR SFDR5A SFDR5B
DMS 5B_EGI*

DMs ___IDLP

Figure G - 5.

If the CC determines there is any EGI failure information, EGI* will be
displayed in the BIT fault window. This information is available through
the detail page (Figure G-5).

EGI Detail BIT Data

Detail failures are listed in the upper portion of the display (Figure G-4,
page G-18).

e 6 KEY status is displayed as UNKEYED, PARITY FAIL, IN
PROGRESS, INCORRECT, or FAIL.

e 2HOUR ALERT is displayed if key coding is due to expire within two
hours.

e BATTERY FAIL is displayed for an internal EGI battery failure.

e ELECT BST REQUIRED is displayed when electronic boresight of
the EGI is required.

e At PB #1NO GPS will cancel out EGI blended solution if boxed.

AVI-8 G-14


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_57.jpeg:
e PB#5 NON Y is available when displayed. When encryption keys
are lost or Y code is off or not boxed, nonencrypted codes can be
selected by boxing NON Y if it is displayed.

e PB #6 EGI deselects EGI detail and takes us back to the BIT page.

EGI Maintenance BIT Display

The EGI maintenance BIT page is selected from the main BIT page.
PB #6 (EGI) will take you to the BIT display (Figure G-6).

BUILT-IN TEST

M

MAINT BIT DISPLAY EGI MAINT BIT DISPLAY

AVI-08-17

Figure G - 6.

EGI electronic boresight (EB) is the only option available. This boresight
is initiated by pushing PB #1 (ELEC BST). The EB aligns the EGI chassis
to the FNU INS chassis and eliminates an additional alignment to the
aircraft body frame. The EB is run automatically at aircraft power up if
the FNU INS is turned on. If the initiated EB is selected, all previous
boresight corrections are cleared and a new EB is commanded. This will
take about four minutes and can be checked by toggling between EGI and
INS on the EADI. A good EB will show no difference in attitude between
the two.

G-15 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_58.jpeg:
EGI Memory Audit

Selecting PB #10 on the maintenance audit page displays the EGI
memory audit (Figure G-7). The OFP version is displayed under
BUILT-IN TEST. Addresses are entered in multiples of 4; the CC will
accept no others. Leading zeros do not need to be entered as the address
window automatically resets to all zeros after entry.

qe

||
MAINT (/ EG! [MAINT] HEX HOLD \\
BST

BUILT-IN TEST BUILT-IN TEST
OFP VERSION: -XXXX

~ OO1AFE28: XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXK

OO1AFE32: XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXK
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXK

OO1AFE3C: XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXK
XXXX XXXX XXXKX XXXX XXXK

M

\ EGI INS AUDIT y 5 6 7 8 9
\“ : Z) —

ie es ee

MAINT BIT DISPLAY EGI MEMORY AUDIT PAGE

F It

A
0
B

1
c
2
D
3
E
4
XO

AVI-08-18

Figure G - 7.

AVI-8 G-16


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_59.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

G-17 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AVI-8 C-1


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_60.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

The F-15E is the first production fighter aircraft to fly with a ring laser
gyro (RLG) inertial navigation system (INS) as standard equipment. The
goal of the RLG INS is to utilize the accuracy and reliability experienced
in commercial RLG INSs, add features to compensate for the dynamic
fighter environment, and provide the aircrew with an accurate and easy to
use navigation tool. The result is an INS that the F-15E pilot turns on,
allows to align for 4 minutes, and virtually forgets until the end of the
mission. The benefits of an RLG versus an analog INS are shown in the
comparison chart (Chart D-1) below:

RLG INS Analog INS
Align Time Full Align (GC) - 4 min Full Align - 9-13 min
Rapid Align (SH) - 40 sec Rapid Align - 3 min
Accuracy 0.8 nm/hr CEP” (design) 2 nm/hr CEP*
Reliability 2000 hrs MTBF** <200 hrs MTBF**

* Circular error probable
** Mean time between failure

NOTE

Actual RLG CEP: approximately 0.37 nm/hr.

Chart D - 1. Comparison of an RLG INS to an Analog INS.

D-1 AVI-8


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_8.jpeg:
Description

The data in this workbook reflects Suite 3 software changes before
TCTO 1F-15E-737. After this TCTO, an embedded global positioning
system (EGI) will replace the current AHRS functions and add to the
reliability and accuracy of on-board position keeping and navigation
systems. Information on the EGI is located in Annex H. The F-15E
fighter navigation unit (FNU) INS will be referred to as the FNU INS or
INS when appropriate and is a separate system from the EGI. The FNU
INS is a self-contained, fully automatic RLG system that supplies the
primary attitude reference for the aircraft, plus provides continuous
present position (PP) monitoring. It also furnishes the LANTIRN, radar,
AFCS, and central computer (CC) systems with aircraft attitude, heading,
velocity, and acceleration information.

Components

The INS consists of three main components. They are the fighter
navigation unit (FNU) mount, the FNU battery, and the inertial sensor
assembly.

FNU Mount

The FNU mount is installed and boresighted in the aircraft prior to

delivery. It has no moving parts and is the location for the following
components.

AVI-8 D-2


Text from AVI-8_INS_page_9.jpeg:
FNU Battery

The battery (Figure D-1) provides power during brief power interruptions.
On the ground, the battery can sustain a two second interruption. In the
air, specifications require it to provide seven seconds of power. (If fully
charged, the battery may last 1-1/2 - 2 minutes.)

Inertial Sensor Assembly (ISA)

The ISA (Figure D-1) contains three complete ring laser gyros (roll, pitch,
and yaw), three analog accelerometers, and the inertial navigation digital

computer.
| __
ae
RLGs
INERTIAL NAVIGATION
DIGITAL COMPUTER
ISA
RA
FNU BATTERY
FNU MOUNT ——™ “Ss KS
= eS AVI-08-01
SL

Figure D - 1. Fighter navigaiton Unit.

D-3 AVI-8


