Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-AIR RADAR
RDR-1
RADAR INTRODUCTION

APRIL 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_10.jpeg:
Sidelobes

Unfortunately, the antenna cannot focus transmitted RF energy into a
precise beam. Some of this RF energy spills over and is also radiated from
the aircraft. As can be seen from Figure D-3, this energy (called sidelobes)
radiates all around the main beam. RF energy can be received in the
sidelobes and be processed by the receiver as a return. The sidelobe from
the antenna, which spills out directly underneath the aircraft and strikes
the ground, returns to the antenna where it is processed and displayed as
an “altitude line.” Its distance out the radar scope is a rough
approximation of aircraft altitude AGL.

SIDE VIEW TOP VIEW

RDR-01-03

Figure D - 3. Sidelobes.

Generally, sidelobes are not strong enough to interfere with actual returns
although they may mask a weak target return at longer ranges. They do,
however, increase the susceptibility to jamming because they can receive
RF energy transmitted from a jamming source.

RDR-1 D-4


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_11.jpeg:
Display

The fourth basic component of a radar system is the display. In older
aircraft an actual cathode ray tube (CRT) was used. In new fighters, the
CRT is replaced by a digitized video display that shows a computer
generated display of received radar energy that has been
“smoothed/filtered” by a signal processor. What all of this really means is
that on newer generation radar displays you see a very “clean” display
(i.e., no altitude line, etc.). Two types of displays are usually available:
the plan position indicator (PPI) and the B-scope.

PPI Scope

The PPI displays azimuth, elevation and range information. All objects
(target returns) are displayed in respect to their actual relationship
(azimuth and range) to each other and to the fighter. In most cases, the
PPI display shows only a portion of the area directly in front of the fighter
(+60° off the nose). The display is pie-shaped with the fighter’s position at
the vertex, which equates to zero range (Figure D-4). Range to a target is
measured from the vertex. Target azimuth is measured as an angle from
the centerline, left or right of the nose. Notice that at short range, targets
are displayed in their correct relationship to each other and to the fighter,
but correctly measuring their azimuth is difficult, hence the PPI scope is
more suited to ground mapping where close-in display is not critical.

AZIMUTH
O°L

60°L

Ne .

Figure D - 4. PPI Display.

RDR-01-04

D-5 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_12.jpeg:
B-Scope

The second type of display is the B-scope. It is rectangular in shape and
measures range in the vertical axis, where distance increases from the
bottom of the display. Azimuth is measured as a distance horizontally
from the centerline (as opposed to the PPI display where an actual angle
is used to measure azimuth). This type of display decreases the problem
of identifying two different targets at close range, but does cause
distortion. The B-scope can be thought of as a PPI-scope with the bottom
stretched out as shown in Figure D-5. The B-scope is commonly used for
air-to-air applications.

ony,

ES

B-SCOPE

RDR-01-05

Figure D - 5. Scope Display.

RDR-1 D-6


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_13.jpeg:
SCAN PATTERNS

Due to the narrow main beam of radar energy used on fighter aircraft,
detecting a target can be a real challenge (akin to looking for a target
through a soda straw). To enhance the ability to detect a target, various
methods are used to increase areas of coverage. Azimuth coverage is
enhanced by sweeping the antenna side-to-side (and hence, the radar
beam) to provide a wide angular coverage (+60°) off the fighter’s nose.
Other methods are used to increase antenna coverage in altitude: conical
scan, raster scan and track-while-scan.

Conical Scan

A narrow beam’s detection capability can be increased to provide
additional altitude coverage by offsetting the radar antenna feedhorn and
rotating the antenna in a circular pattern. This concept is called nutation
and has two effects: (1) increased antenna coverage in altitude (Figure
D-6) and (2) with some additions to the radar system, the ability to more
precisely track a target in azimuth and elevation.

INCREASE
IN

ALTITUDE
COVERAGE

RDR-01-06

Figure D - 6. Conical Scan.

D-7 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_14.jpeg:
Raster Scan

A raster scan (Figure D-7) uses a thin beam to cover a rectangular area by
horizontally sweeping the area while incrementally stepping up or down
the elevation angle with each horizontal sweep of the sector. The
elevation angle is reset to the original value after the sector is covered and
the process repeats.

BAR equals basic antenna raster. One horizontal (sometimes vertical)
sweep is called one BAR. Figure D-7 is displaying six BARS of sweep,
each at different elevations. The complete sweep pattern (six BARS in
this example) is called the frame. Frame time is the total time to sweep
the frame and return to the starting place.

1° BAR SPACING

RDR-01-07

Figure D - 7. Raster Scan.

RDR-1 D-8


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_15.jpeg:
Track-While-Scan (TWS)

Pure search radar modes display the targets detected on each scan. The
range, doppler and angle for each detected target may also be displayed or
available. Each antenna scan is independent of all others. No effort is
made to decide if a detection on one scan is of the same target as a
detection on a previous scan or if it is a detection of a new target.

On the other hand, track-while-scan (Figure D-8) combines search and
track features. The antenna scans a raster pattern (frame) similar to the
search pattern discussed earlier. However, unlike the search mode, the
radar computer decides automatically whether a detection belongs to a
target that was seen on a previous scan or if it belongs to a new target.
This means that sequential detections from the same target are processed
into measurements similar to a single target tracking mode and are
filtered to estimate the target’s position, velocity and acceleration. This
data composes part of what is called the target’s track file. TWS is
described more completely in later lessons.

xawur SCAN

TARGET
DETECTION

RDR-01-08

Figure D - 8. Four Bar Track-While-Scan (TWS).

D-9 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_16.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
1-4. There are four components of a basic radar system. On the diagram

in Figure D-9 below, label the transmitter, receiver, antenna and
display.

a I

Cc
iz al
RDR-01-09
Figure D - 9.

5. Ona PPI scope, the sidelobe which strikes the ground directly
beneath the aircraft and returns to the antenna where it is processed,
is displayed as a/an

main beam.
altitude line.
ground return.
clutter line.

pe op

6. The display most suited for ground mapping is the

a. B-scope.
b. GCI-scope.
c. | PPI-scope.
d. _E-scope.

RDR-1 D-10


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_17.jpeg:
One method used to increase altitude coverage in a horizontal radar
scan pattern is

doppler shift.

PPI scan.

elevation scan.

multiple BAR scan (raster scan)

pe op

D-11 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_18.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1-4.

TRANSMITTER ——_— = oo

eRe on

RECEIVER
ANTENNA

DISPLAY — gprot-t0

Figure D - 10.

5. b
6. ¢
7. d

RDR-1 D-12


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_19.jpeg:
PULSED RADARS

Radio frequency energy has several properties that must be understood to
grasp basic radar theory. Pulsed radars operate in the time domain and
are excellent at measuring range on all aspect targets at medium and
short range but are poor at long range or in look-down situations.

Propagation

Radar energy travels through the atmosphere in a straight line at the
speed of light, (i.e., cannot “see” through terrain or over the horizon), and
the amount of radar energy returned (or reflected) to the source radar is
influenced by the reflectivity of the object it strikes.

Radar energy travels at 162,000 nm/sec. For this energy to traverse 1 nm
takes 6.2 usec (usec = microsecond or 1/1,000,000 of a second). Since radar
energy must make a two-way trip it actually takes 12.4 usec to travel a
radar mile (1 nm out and 1 nm back). Another way to express how fast
radar waves travel is to say that RF energy goes approximately 984 feet in
1 usec.

The amount of radar energy coming back to the source radar is a function
of the target’s reflectivity. A target’s reflectivity is simply the term used
to describe the power that is reflected or scattered by the target. The
reflectivity of a target is determined by:

aspect

size

material

shape
engine/blade rpm

D-18 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: RDR-1, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_20.jpeg:
If you point a radar at a large piece of metal with a flat polished surface,
most of the radiated energy returns (as shown by the KC-10 depicted in
Figure D-11). Targets with knobs and flat surfaces toward the radar
source have higher reflectivity and provide the best returns. Smooth,
rounded objects have low reflectivity and reflect most of the radiated

energy away from the source.

FACTORS \V\\ //

AFFECTING:

- ASPECT \\\ J /
- SIZE

- RPM OF ENGINES ee

Figure D - 11. Reflectivity.

RDR-1 D-14

RDR-01-11


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_21.jpeg:
Anatomy of a Pulse

A radar pulse is defined by the amount of time the transmitter is turned
on. The transmitter must then shut down to allow the antenna to listen
for reflected energy. This ON/OFF cycle repeats many times a second.
The number of pulses present during the cycle (pulses per second) is
known as the pulse repetition frequency (PRF) and is measured in hertz
(Hz) or cycles per second. Two successive pulses from a radar transmitter
are shown in Figure D-12. The time the transmitter is actually
transmitting (ON) defines the pulse width (PW). The time from the
beginning of one pulse to the beginning of the next pulse is called the
pulse repetition interval (PRI). The time from the end of the pulse
recovery time (RT) to the beginning of the dead time (DT) is known as the
actual listening time.

PULSE PULSE

<—PW—>|<x—_RT——~|<ACTUAL LISTEN TIME> oo

PRF = PULSE REPETITION FREQUENCY

PRI = PULSE REPETITION INTERVAL

PW = PULSE WIDTH/ PULSE DURATION

RT = RECOVERY TIME

DT = DEAD TIME RDR-01-12

Figure D - 12. Pulse Cycle.

D-15 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_22.jpeg:
Maximum Range

Maximum range is dependent on listening time. Some of the possible
listening time is unavailable during the time the antenna is transferring
from transmit to receive functions and again when it changes from the
receive to the transmit mode. These unavailable times are referred to as
recovery time and dead time, respectively. Maximum practical detection
range (in nm) is then:

Actual Listening Time (usec)

12.4 (usec/nm)

Minimum Range

The recovery time immediately following transmission depends on the
design of the radar. Since the radar cannot see a target while it is either
transmitting or recovering, the minimum theoretical range depends on
these two times. The inability of a radar to process a return during these
times is referred to as eclipsing. For example, given a PW of 5.2 usec and
a recovery time of 1.0 usec, the total time that the radar cannot receive is
6.2 usec. Using 984 as the distance radar energy travels in 1 usec,
minimum range can be determined by the formula:

(PW + RT) x 984
—_—_—__—_—— = Minimum Range
2 (two-way trip)

Minimum range for the above example is determined by:

(5.2 + 1.0) x 984
2

= 3050.4

Therefore, in this example, a target must be more than 3050.4 feet away
to be seen.

RDR-1 D-16


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_23.jpeg:
Range Ambiguity

Ambiguous returns are associated with pulsed radars. As shown in
Figure D-13, ambiguity occurs when the reflected energy comes back in a
pulse listening period other than the one from which it was transmitted.
The radar sees the return but does not correlate it to the corresponding
transmitted pulse. This is called range ambiguity. Range is displayed in
relation to the immediately preceding pulse, which makes range
computation incorrect. In other words, the returned energy from pulse
one may be displayed at a range that equates to a return from pulse two
(Figure D-13). There is a maximum range measurement limitation in any
pulse radar and it is PRF dependent. This range is referred to as
maximum unambiguous range for a particular PRF. Low PRFs have a
long range measuring capability before ambiguity occurs. High PRFs
have a very short range measuring capability before ambiguity occurs.
Other more sophisticated ranging methods have been devised to overcome
range ambiguity.

1 2 3

RETURN FROM
< R max UNAMBIGUOUS > PULSE 1

RDR-01-13

Figure D - 13. Pulse Timing.

Position Determination
Merely detecting a target is insufficient. Once you determine that a target

exists, you must then determine its position relative to you in range and
azimuth.

D-17 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_24.jpeg:
Determining Target Range

Remember that your radar uses a single antenna for both transmission
and reception of energy. This allows a ranging method using high energy
pulses. Range is determined by transmitting a small burst of energy and
measuring the time necessary for the energy to travel to the target and
return to the receiver. Distance can be computed directly.

As already stated, radar energy travels at the speed of light and since it
must make a two-way trip in detecting a target, it takes 12.4 usec to
travel 1 nm. Hence, range to the target can be found by dividing the time
difference between transmitted and received pulses by 12.4. The formula
for this is shown as:

Time Between Transmit and Receive (usec)
Target Range (nm) = —<§_ —---A
12.4 (usec/nm)

In a typical long range search radar, the transmitted pulse has a duration
of about 5 usec. RF energy travels at the speed of light (984 feet/usec) so
the leading edge of the pulse is about 4900 feet from the antenna when
the transmitter shuts off and the receiver begins listening for echo
returns. Therefore, as shown in Figure D-14, the incident pulse has a
length of 4900 feet.

INCIDENT PULSE aan

es |

RDR-01-14

Figure D - 14. Target Range.

RDR-1 D-18


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_25.jpeg:
It would take about 62 usec for the leading edge of the pulse traveling at
the speed of light to reach the target. The pulse would then reflect back
through itself as shown in Figure D-15.

REFLECTED waves { { \ \ \\ a=~

4o MILES

1

RDR-01-15

Figure D - 15. Pulse Leading Edge.

D-19 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_26.jpeg:
The entire reflected pulse would travel back toward the receiver at the
speed of light, making the trip in another 62 usec (Figure D-16). It takes
124 usec for the pulse to complete a round trip from the antenna to the
target and back. Therefore, target range would be

124 usec
————— = 10nm
12.4 usec /nm

Determining Target Azimuth

The target’s azimuth could be determined by pointing a stationary narrow
beam at the target. If the beam width was 1° and an echo was displayed
on the scope, you would know the target azimuth within 1°. This is not,
however, a practical solution to azimuth determination because all targets
outside of the 1° beam width would go undetected by radar.

REFLECTED PULSE / ff

[
etek \
\ %
\ XY »®

ne

RDR-01-16

Figure D - 16. Pulse Reflection.

Continuously rotating the antenna through a full 360° (or portion thereof)
and correlating the presence and range of an echo with the antenna
azimuth at the time of the received echo solves this problem.

RDR-1 D - 20


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_27.jpeg:
As the antenna rotates in a clockwise direction, it will eventually reach an
angular area wherein several consecutive transmitted pulses are reflected
by the target back to the antenna (Figure D-17). In this instance each of
these pulses will complete the round trip in 124 usec and generate a
bright spot on the display. The position of the spot will correspond to the
range and azimuth of the target.

z
ty)
N
i

THE TIME REQUIRED FOR THE
RADAR PULSE TO GO FROM THE
ANTENNA TO THE TARGET AND
BACK IS 124 USEC.

090

180 RDR-01-17

Figure D - 17. Azimuth and Range Determination.

Azimuth ambiguity of some returns is the result of the width of the beam
and the distance of the object. A 1° beam is only 17-1/2 feet wide at 1000
feet from the antenna. At 20 nm from the antenna, that same 1° spreads
to include over 2000 feet as shown in Figure D-18. In other words, there
may be two bogeys out there even though you can only see one.

D-21 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_28.jpeg:
Resolution

When a pulse radar operates, each transmitted pulse has some physical
properties that cause problems in resolving azimuth and range.

Azimuth Resolution

The ability to differentiate targets in azimuth depends on the width of the
beam at the target range. The larger the beam width, and the greater the
range, the more area the beam covers. From trigonometry you know that
the length of an arc of 1° at a distance of 60 nm covers 1 nm (or 6000 feet).
This is also known as the 1-in-60 rule. From this you can see that a radar
with a 1° beam width covers 6000 feet at a distance of 60 nm. With this 1°
beam width radar, two targets at a range of 60 nm would have to be at
least 6000 feet apart to show as separate targets. As range decreases, less
distance between the targets is required to display as separate targets (at
20 nm, 1° = 2000 feet; at 30 nm, 1° = 3000 feet etc). Figure D-18 shows
that at 20 nm, two F-15Es flying with a 1500-foot wingtip spread appear
as a single contact to a 1° beam width radar.

BEAM WIDTH VERSUS WIDTH OF BEAM

1° AT 20 NM = 2000' BW

RDR-01-18

Figure D - 18. One Degree Beam at 20 nm.

RDR-1 D - 22


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_29.jpeg:
Multiple targets must be separated by at least the width of the beam at
target range to display separately. Figure D-19 depicts three targets (A, B
and C). Target A is separated from target B by 600 feet and target B is
separated from target C by 2400 feet.

A B C
7 ¥ <co0> ¥ < 2400" -¥
1° BEAM
3000'
A B C
7 —¥ <c00>¥ < 2400' -¥
1° BEAM
30 NM < 2000’ >
20NM A B Cc
xr ¥ <c00>¥ < 2400' -¥
1° BEAM
<—1000'——>
10 NM
aN
YW _ 1° BEAM WIDTH EXAMPLE

RDR-01-19

Figure D - 19. Multiple Target Azimuth Resolution.

At a range of 30 nm the width of the beam covers all three targets
simultaneously and only one target is displayed on the radar scope. As
range decreases to 20 nm the beam covers both target A and B, but as the
trailing edge of the beam leaves target B, the leading edge of the beam
has not yet arrived at target C. As the leading edge strikes target C, the
trailing edge has left target B and thus the radar displays two targets.
The radar would not be able to differentiate three separate targets until
range decreases to less than 6 nm.

D - 238 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-AIR RADAR

= 40

coor
ojo i_0 ty 5 5 ho a 1

COVER

RADAR INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION

This text provides a general overview of airborne radar operating
characteristics. The information contained in this workbook is essential
for your understanding of the F-15K air-to-air radar discussed in later
lessons. This text describes basic radar components, pulse radar
operation, doppler radar operation and addresses the functions of radar
systems.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0000. eecceeeseeeesneeceseeesssaeecesaaeecnsaeeeesaeesssaeesensaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).......0....eeeeeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.0... eeeeeees C-1
CL TEAT sos sures sas cos cores canis anais cru amen sexs ansis cas mo Mas oes GSA MaRS Seis MNS Ka HOEK Saws OnE CoReD MoM Ma On D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo... ec eecceeeseeessceceseeeessaeesesaeesensaeesesaeeesaees E-1
Hp ce cere ee ees se ces cea cmt ses oe an ce ates ss ce ane ss tae sere ces ee ees se oe F-1

A-1 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_30.jpeg:
Range Resolution

Since a pulse of radar energy has a physical length, multiple targets at
different ranges also present resolution problems. In this case, however,
the ability to resolve targets is only a function of the pulse length (PL). As
a pulse of radar energy strikes a target, the leading edge of the pulse
begins to reflect back to the sending radar. As long as two targets are
separated in range by more than 1/2 the PL, they will resolve into two
distinct targets. For a 1 usec pulse width, two targets must be separated
by 500 feet in range to show as distinct targets.

Resolution Cell
If both azimuth resolution and range resolution are considered, a

resolution cell (volume) may be constructed (Figure D-20) with boundaries
defined by beam width at target range and by half the PL.

WIDTH OF BEAM
AT TARGET RANGE,

RDR-01-20

Figure D - 20. Resolution Cell.

Multiple aircraft within the cell will appear as one target on the radar
display.

RDR-1 D - 24


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_31.jpeg:
Pulse Spectrum/Clutter Theory

One problem associated with pulse radars is that radar energy is not only
reflected from targets of interest, but from other objects, including the
earth's surface. Sometimes these unwanted returns are referred to as
noise. Some noise is internal to the radar set due to leakage of RF energy.
Some noise comes from energy returned in the antenna sidelobes and
some noise results from main beam contact with the ground.
Unfortunately, some of this noise masks true target returns. Figure D-21
depicts an airborne pulse radar with the main beam striking the ground
at some range. At all the points where sidelobes strike the ground, energy
is reflected back to the radar (ground return). These returns show up on
the radar display as an altitude line, sidelobe clutter and main beam
returns, which may be stronger than other target returns. Sidelobe
clutter (SLC) is all types of sidelobe energy clutter on the radar display
that interfere with the true target return. Main beam clutter (MBC) is
clutter on the radar display that comes from main beam contact with the
surface (ground return).

Ht

AGL

ALT LINE SIDELOBE res GND
SIDELOBE CLUTTER RETURN
(SLC)

aS
MAIN BEAM CLUTTER (MBC)

MBC AND TGT

SLC AND TGT (A)

ALT LINE

RDR-01-21

Figure D - 21. Pulse Clutter.

D-25 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_32.jpeg:
If the amplitude of returns is graphed as a function of range, as shown in
Figure D-22, it can be seen that target amplitude must exceed MBC and
SLC to be seen. Hence, target B will not be seen, while target A will show
on the radar as a target. This happens because target A has a higher
amplitude than the sidelobe clutter at the same range. A disadvantage of
pulse radar is poor look-down capability because main beam clutter from
ground returns mask real target returns.

A —_—__ RANGE—>

AMPLITUDE

ALT SLC —_MBC-————>
LINE

RDR-01-22

Figure D - 22. Target Amplitude.

RDR-1 D - 26


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_33.jpeg:
DOPPLER RADARS

Doppler radars exploit frequency changes of the transmitted radar signal.
Doppler radars operate in the frequency domain (compared to the time
domain for pulse radars) and are excellent at detecting front aspect
targets even in look-down situations. They are poor for accurate range
measurement.

Doppler Shift

A pure doppler radar uses a continuous wave (CW) of radio frequency
energy with the transmitter turned ON and left ON (as opposed to a
pulsed wave where the transmitter goes through an ON/OFF cycle). A
pure CW radar uses two antennas: one for transmitting and another for
receiving. No timing scheme is used in this CW operation; however, small
changes in frequency can readily be seen. This change in frequency is
called doppler shift.

In essence, doppler shift occurs due to the closing (or opening) velocity of a
target in respect to the transmitter. If the transmitter is stationary and
sends out a radar signal at a fixed frequency, it is reflected from other
objects.

D-27 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_34.jpeg:
If this signal is reflected back from another stationary object, the received
signal is at the same frequency as the transmitted signal. If the second
object is moving toward the transmitter, the object reflects and
“compresses” the wavefront of the CW signal. This compression of the
wavefront causes the transmitted signal to come back at a higher
frequency. Conversely, an object moving away from the transmitter
“stretches” the wavefront and the signal returns at a lower frequency.
This shift of the transmitted frequency is the doppler shift (see Figure
D-23). Knowing that the frequency is shifted higher tells us that the
target is moving toward us; by knowing how much the frequency is
shifted, we can calculate the target's velocity using the factor 1 KHz =
30 knots.

STATIONARY RADAR TARGET

X-MIT 4
30KH,,-
NO SHIFT = STATIONARY

RCV
30KH,,

J

X-MIT
30KH,,

!

<— CLOSING = HIGHER
RCV FREQ
33KH, =

X-MIT (|
30KH,"\ [
—> OPENING = LOW

RCV {| FREQ
27KH, —

1KHz= 30 KNOTS

RDR-01-23

Figure D - 23. Doppler Shift.

Obviously the same phenomenon applies to an airborne radar versus a
stationary radar. However, in the case of an airborne doppler radar, the
host radar is moving and stationary targets appear at a frequency shift
equal to the fighter’s velocity. In other words, all closure is due to the
fighter's speed. Additionally, targets with no frequency shift would be
those going directly away at the same speed as the host radar.

RDR-1 D - 28


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_35.jpeg:
Doppler Spectrum/Clutter Theory

Just as the pulse radar receives returns from the main beam and
sidelobes, so does a doppler radar. However, in a doppler radar, the
effects of ground clutter are different. The line across the center of the
chart depicted in Figure D-24 represents velocity.

MAIN BEAM
ALTITUDE CLUTTER
LINE
NN <—SIDELOBE CLUTTER REGION —» <— CLEAR REGION ——»
INCREASING
SIGNAL
AMPLITUDE
TRANSMITTER INCREASING TRANSMITTER
FREQUENCY FREQUENCY ~ FREQUENCY
Vv Vv
ie) F CLOSING VELOCITIES
+ yetocities **#————veocities + GREATER THAN | >
FIGHTER VELOCITY
TOP VIEW
#1 #2 #3 #4

500 400 500 500
KTS KTS KTS KTS
SAME SPEED OVERTAKING #2 BEAM ASPECT NOSE ASPECT
AS #1 TO #3 TO #4
500 KTS 500 KTS 500 KTS 500 KTS

RDR-01-24

Figure D - 24. Doppler Clutter Spectrum.

D - 29 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_36.jpeg:
The same axioms that were examined in pulse radar clutter can be
derived from the chart. However, the altitude line, sidelobe clutter and
main beam clutter appear at positions relating to a certain velocity
(frequency shift), rather than range. The altitude line is at the same place
that a return from a target with no opening or closing velocity would
appear. Any targets being overtaken at a speed greater than zero from
the stern would appear in the sidelobe clutter region. A beam target is
competing with the main beam clutter since the doppler shift from both is
equal to the groundspeed of the fighter. Doppler radars usually lose
targets that move into main beam clutter. Targets that are head-on or
front-aspect appear in the clear region beyond main beam clutter; doppler
radars are optimized to detect these targets.

FM Doppler Ranging

As has been pointed out, CW radars cannot provide range information;
but, there is a technique that allows range estimation by modulating the
radar frequency. This technique is called frequency modulated ranging
(FM ranging or FM ramping). Transmitting a constant frequency for a
short period of time, then changing the frequency (ramping) for a short
period of time, and then returning to the original frequency produces the
effect of short bursts of “coded” frequencies. As the signal returns it is
possible to correlate a returned signal to its codified (ramped) transmit
frequency. This allows the radar to use a timing system and provide a
range estimation on a target (see Figure D-25).

RDR-01-25

Figure D - 25. FM Ranging.

RDR-1 D - 30


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_37.jpeg:
Pulsed Doppler

Some fighters utilize a “pulsed doppler” radar. This system combines both
the characteristics of a pulse radar and a doppler radar by transmitting
bursts (or pulses) and measuring the return from a target utilizing both
the time and the velocity domains. In other words, it uses timing of pulses
for ranging and doppler for velocity. This is accomplished by transmitting
at a very high PRF, which can be thought of as “near” continuous wave
(Figure D-26). By combining both pulse and doppler techniques these
radars take advantage of both long-range detection of front-aspect targets
(even in a look-down environment) and accurate range measurement on
all aspect targets. A pulse doppler radar is essentially an all-aspect
doppler radar.

\ ( \ \
Aj pM :

RDR-01-26

Figure D - 26. Pulsed Doppler.

D-31 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_38.jpeg:
TARGET TRACKING

The two major functions of fighter radars are searching and tracking. The
process of searching finds the target and has been discussed. Tracking is
used to gain more information on the target (e.g., heading, airspeed,
altitude, etc.); but, more importantly, tracking allows the aircrew to focus
on a primary target for air-to-air weapons delivery. This section deals
with various methods used to track a target: range/velocity tracking,
conical scan, monopulse and phase comparison monopulse.

Range/Velocity Tracking

After target returns come back to the receiver they are sent to the
processor. Range information is obtained by timing. Target returns are
then placed in range bins (i.e., a “storage” bin that’s size is determined by
pulse width). The operator signifies the desire to track a target by
manipulating some radar display symbol at the target location (i.e.,
acquisition symbols). This action identifies a specific return in the range
bins and “gates” it. As the return changes range, the gate moves along
with it and “tracks” the identified target. As range changes over time, a
rate of change is computed and displayed as overtake (Vc).

Velocity trackers work in much the same manner by using frequency (or
velocity) bins to identify a specific target. It is then tracked using a
velocity gate. No calculation is required to compute overtake since
velocity is already known from doppler shift.

Angle Tracking
It is necessary to track a target in azimuth and elevation to keep the

fighter’s radar pointed at the target, especially for certain types of
air-to-air missiles (i.e., the AIM-7).

RDR-1 D - 32


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_39.jpeg:
Conical Scan Tracker

As previously stated, a conical scan (conscan) pattern is the result of
offsetting the antenna feedhorn and rotating the assembly. Altitude
coverage is increased, but also an overlapping pattern in the center of the
conscan pattern is developed. The radar measures the amplitude in each
of the scanned quadrants as shown in Figure D-27.

ROTATION ROTATION

NO ERROR SIGNAL ERROR SIGNAL GENERATED
(CENTERED) (OFF CENTER)

Vs>
-
yy
o
- H

RDR-01-27

Figure D - 27. Conical Scan Tracking.

D - 33 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the basic principles of pulse radar to include range/range
rate determination.

2. Identify the basic principles of doppler radar to include velocity and
range determination.

3. Identify situations where a pulsed radar has advantage over a
doppler radar.

4. Identify situations where a doppler radar has advantage over a
pulsed radar.

REFERENCES

AFP 51-45, Electronic Combat Principles, 15 Sept 87

Stimson, George W. Introduction to Airborne Radar. (2nd ed.). SciTech
Publishing, Inc., 1998

RDR-1 B-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_40.jpeg:
When the antenna boresight is pointed at the target the amplitude of the
return is equal in all quadrants. If the target moves in azimuth/elevation,
then the amplitude will be higher in one quadrant and lower in others.
This action generates an error signal that results in the antenna slewing
back over the target and thus equalizing the amplitude in each of the
quadrants. Note that the illustration depicts only four quadrants; in
reality there are many quadrants as the antenna scans the target.

Monopulse Tracker

Monopulse trackers get azimuth, elevation, range and velocity information
from each single pulse (hence monopulse) of returned energy. Azimuth
and elevation errors are generated to equalize the sum of the quadrants as
shown in Figure D-28.

AZIMUTH ERROR = (A + C) - (B + D)
IF (A+C) - (B+ D) =0 NOERROR

ELEVATION ERROR = (A + B) - (C + D)
IF (A+B) - (C+D) =0 NOERROR

IF A=B=C=D THE TARGET IS CENTERED

RDR-01-28

Figure D - 28. Monopulse Radar.

RDR-1 D - 34


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_41.jpeg:
Phase Comparison Monopulse Tracker

A phase comparison monopulse antenna uses a hybrid monopulse
technique. Azimuth, elevation, and range, as well as doppler information
are received from a single pulse of returned energy. A sum/difference is
computed for azimuth and elevation tracking. Additionally, the wave
front of returned energy is checked for phase angle (6) difference. Ifa
phase difference is found, an error signal is generated to reorient the
antenna in azimuth/elevation (Figure D-29).

SUM OF 1 AND 3 COMPARED TO SUM OF 2 AND 4 = AZIMUTH ERROR
SUM OF 1 AND 2 COMPARED TO SUM OF 3 AND 4 = ELEVATION ERROR

SUM AND
DIFFERENCE
‘a HYBRID

FOUR QUADRANT
PLANAR ARRAY ANTENNA
a

PHASE ANGLE TRACKER

= WAVEFRONT PHASE ERROR RDR-01-29

Figure D - 29. Phase Comparison Monopulse Tracker.

D- 35 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_42.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The amount of energy that returns to the source radar is a function of

the target’s

a. PRF.

b. reflectivity.
c. speed.

d. altitude.

2. Radar waves travel at the speed of light or

a. 62 feet/usec.

b. 984 feet/usec.
c. 1200 feet/usec.
d. 4900 feet/usec.

3. Doppler radars do not provide ranging information to the target.
Which of the following methods is used to find range in doppler
radar?

Frequency modulation (FM ranging)
PRF stagger

Two antennas

Double frequency return echoes

po op

RDR-1 D - 36


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_43.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D- 37 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_44.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-1 D- 38


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_45.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

During which of the following times are all target returns/echoes
processed?

Actual listening time
Recovery time

Pulse recurrence time
Dead time

po op

A radar mile measures the time required for radar energy to travel
one mile and return. A radar mile is expressed in time as which of
the following?

a. 6.2 usec

b. 12.4 usec
c. 1240 usec
d. 2seconds

Doppler shift occurs when

a. _ the receiver is shut down.

b. the target closes/opens on the fighter radar.
c Vc is presented on the display.

d. velocity bins are full.

E-1 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_46.jpeg:
Use the diagram below to complete questions 4-6.

4. Which letter on the diagram corresponds to main beam clutter?

pe op

5. Which letter on the diagram corresponds to the altitude line?

af of

6. The area between B and C is called:

sidelobe clutter.
main beam clutter.
the altitude line.
the clear region.

pe op

==. ,

RDR-01-30

Figure F - 1.

RDR-1 E-2


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_47.jpeg:
AGL

BAR

BIRDS

BW

CRT

CW

DT

FM

KHz

MBC

PL

PPI

PRF

PRI

PW

RF

RT

SLC

GLOSSARY

Above ground level

Basic antenna raster
False radar targets/returns
Beam width

Cathode ray tube
Continuous wave

Dead time

Frequency modulation
Hertz

Kilo-hertz

Main beam clutter

Pulse length

Plan position indicator
Pulse repetition frequency
Pulse repetition interval
Pulse width

Radio frequency

Recovery time

Sidelobe clutter
Track-while-scan

Velocity of closure

RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the quiz.

C-1 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-1 C-2


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
BASIC COMPONENTS
Most airborne radars consist of four essential components:
@ Transmitter
@ Receiver
@ Antenna
@ Display indicator
Figure D-1 depicts the relationship of these basic functional components.
Transmitter
The transmitter generates a high powered radio frequency (RF) signal
that is radiated by the antenna. This signal is generated by a high-power

magnetron oscillator. The details of transmitter function are not essential
for your understanding of the radar system.

TRANSMITTER

UOMOIGIOIG

RECEIVER
ANTENNA

DISPLAY — pprot-04

Figure D - 1. Functional Components.

D-1 RDR-1


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_8.jpeg:
Receiver

The receiver amplifies and filters RF signals (also called returns) received
by the antenna. As with the transmitter, it is not important for you to
remember detailed information regarding the receiver. Remember that
the receiver listens for the echoes of the waves previously transmitted by
the antenna.

Antenna

Both the transmitter and receiver share a common antenna. Since only
one antenna is used, it is important to note that the radar cannot send
signals out (from the transmitter) and receive signals back (to the
receiver) at the same time. It must be either a transmitter or a receiver.
Additionally, the antenna must focus the RF energy into a narrow beam to
aid in azimuth and elevation determination of detected airborne targets.

RDR-1 D-2


Text from RDR-1_Radar_Introduction_page_9.jpeg:
Main Beam

The narrow beam of energy, which is transmitted along the centerline of
the antenna, is referred to as the main beam. It is defined by the points
where the transmitted power drops from maximum strength (along the
centerline) to one-half power (known as the half power points). The size of
the main beam is called the beam width and is measured in degrees (see
Figure D-2). The narrower the beam the more accurate the azimuth and
elevation measurements of the radar. Note that the antenna is swept
side-to-side in a 120° pattern (or portions thereof) to measure azimuth,
which is referenced to the fighter’s nose.

BEAM WIDTH
(DEGREES)

1/2 POWER
\ POINTS

RADIATED
POWER

/ 1/2 POWER

POINTS

RDR-01-02

Figure D - 2. Main Beam.

D-3 RDR-1


