Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-AIR RADAR
RDR-5
AIR-TO-AIR RADAR EMPLOYMENT

JULY 1998

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_10.jpeg:
Obviously, for any given scan rate, the frame time is inversely
proportional to the frame’s azimuth and elevation parameters. Sixty
degree azimuth scan provides one half the frame time of 120° azimuth
scan; 2-bar elevation scan provides one half the frame time of 4-bar. Let
us look at a few data points, remembering that for interleaved pulse
repetition frequency (IPRF) search, 2 frames are required to insure both
medium pulse repetition frequency (MPRF) and high pulse repetition
frequency (HPRF) coverage of the entire search volume.

Frame Time and Range Scale Selection

Range while search (RWS) provides a faster scan rate at short range (90°
per second on the 10 nm or 20 nm range scale) where a faster refresh rate
is more important. The longer display ranges (40,80 or 160 nm range
scales) provide a slower scan rate (longer dwell time). Six-bar/120°
azimuth on the longer range scales provides a frame time of about 10
seconds. Two frames (required for IPRF) take about 20 seconds. At the
shorter ranges you would likely be using 60° azimuth and MPRF (so that
only one frame is required). This situation provides a four second frame
time.

Frame Time and Mode Selection

Range gated high (RGH) and track-while-scan (TWS) use this same logic,
providing slower or faster scan rates, depending on range scale selection.
RGH uses a PRF lower than RWS HPRF, so it uses a slower scan rate (for
longer dwell time) and hence a longer frame time than RWS (for the same
search volume). TWS, at longer ranges, needs a slower scan rate (50°/sec)
because of the additional processing time it requires, but keeps the frame
time acceptable by using smaller search volumes. Note that HDTWS

(2- or 3-bar/30°) provides a fast frame time for quickly building track files
and refreshing maneuvering targets, attributes usually desirable during
the sorting process. Lastly, note that (search) sort (30° azimuth scan)
pairs elevation bar scans with ranges to provide appropriate altitude
coverage (more elevation bars on the shorter range scales) while it
provides fast frame times, desirable during the sorting process.

RDR-5 D-4


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_11.jpeg:
Search Altitude Coverage

The radar’s altitude coverage is based on range from the aircraft, the
radar’s 2.5° beam width, elevation bar selection and elevation bar spacing.

MODE RANGE (ELEVATION BAR | ANGULAR
SELECTED SCALE BARS SPACING | DEGREES

RWS /RGH/VS/VCTR| 40/80/160 1 NIA | 2.5
7 | 40/80/1460 1.0 | a5
| 40/80/4160 1.0 | 5.5
[| 40/80/1680 | 6 1.0 75
40/80/1680 | & 1.60 $5
10/20 |SAME ABOVE SAME ABOVE|SAME ABOVE
10 NA 25
10 3.4 5.9
10 3.4 12.7
10
10
20:
20:
20
20:

34
MA,
2.5
25
25
2.5

26.3
25
5.0

|
3.4 19.5

GO) Gp) fe) Ra) =e | Go) oa) fe) A] ae

60° TWS
30° TWS
HDT (30°)
15° TWS

3.4 26.3
2.5 46.9
15-25 7.0-10.0
80 7160 1.0 3.5

RDR-05-02

Figure D - 3. Search Altitude Coverage.

D-5 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_12.jpeg:
In the search modes [(RWS, RGH, velocity search (VS) and vector (VCTR)]
the elevation bar selection is at aircrew discretion. The radar designers
provided for wider angular elevation coverage at shorter range scales (to
ensure sufficient altitude coverage) by increasing the bar spacing in all
modes except VCTR.

Although the radar altitude coverage (at the acquisition symbol range)
can be determined directly from the radar (digital readout at the
acquisition symbol and the altitude coverage circles), still consider the
following rules of thumb (RWS, RGH, VS, VCTR), based on range scale
selection.

P| > 40 RANGE 20 RANGE 10 RANGE
a a

600 FT / NM 1000 FT / NM 1300 FT / NM

800 FT / NM 1600 FT / NM 2000 FT / NM

RDR-05-03

Figure D - 4. Elevation Coverage Rules of Thumb.

Hence, during long range search with 6-bar elevation scan, the altitude
coverage at 25 nm from the aircraft would be 20,000 feet.

Another method for computing altitude coverage at a given range is:
e >40nm display range: (bars + 2 x range x 100)
e = [(6+ 2) x 25 x 100] = 8 x 25 x 100 = 20,000 ft

e 20nm display range: (bars + 2 x scribe number x 100)
(Figure D-5)

e [(+2)x3x 1000] =8x3x 1000 = 24,000 ft

RDR-5 D-6


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_13.jpeg:
RDR-05-04

Figure D - 5. 20 nm Range Elevation coveage.

THE S’s FOR SUCCESS

For years, aviators trying to learn to efficiently employ the APG-70 have
found it useful to break the big picture down into a series of tasks.

SEARCH | SAMPLE | SANITIZE | SORT SHOOT | SHOOT | RANGE

RWS RWS (H/M/)) /M/1) RWS —Rwsi RWS (Mm) (M) RWS RWS (mM) |

RGH HIGHLIGHT =| HIGHLIGHT SORT AUTO GUNS

vs TWS (ND) TWS SORT Ss

TWS (D)

HDTWS

DTT

RDR-05-05

Figure D - 6. The S’s For Success.

D-7 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_14.jpeg:
Even experienced aviators return to this concept over and over, albeit
sometimes subconsciously. With experience, the tasks become more
second nature. The beginner, however, should constantly ask: “What, at
this moment, am I trying to accomplish and am I using the appropriate
radar modes and radar options to best achieve the results I want, under
the current set of circumstances?” These tasks are commonly referred to
as the S’s for success. They are search, sample, sanitize, sort, shoot, and
short range. “Survive” is frequently added between shoot and short range.
Shoot, survive and short range will be addressed in great detail during the
air-to-air weapons (AAW) and air-to-air maneuvering (AAM) workbooks,
lectures and CBT lessons. For now, we will limit the discussion to search,
sample, sanitize and sort.

Search

This task involves finding an aircraft (target). In a patrol situation, the
aircrew searches a desired (or assigned) volume of airspace. In a multi
aircraft formation the larger volume of airspace is usually divided among
the aircraft as a function of altitude at a given range. For example,
members of a two ship formation may search surface to 20,000 feet at 25
miles and 18,000 to 38,000 at 25 miles. With no information about
possible targets, the search is generally performed in 120° azimuth scan
and 40 or 80 mile radar range scale.

Sample

The objective of sampling is to obtain all the information you can about a
particular target or targets so you can decide upon the best course of
action to achieve the desired results. Desired information includes
altitude, airspeed, heading and aspect. You will maneuver your
aircraft/formation based on this information. Sampling is generally
accomplished using a radar track mode, like single target track (STT),
dual target track (DTT), or designated track-while-scan (DTWS).
Highlight can also be used for sampling because it provides track
information, but it is generally considered a search (vice track) mode.

RDR-5 D-8


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_15.jpeg:
Sanitize

With the sampled target information in hand, use the radar’s search
capabilities to determine if there are other aircraft or groups of aircraft in
addition to the originally sampled target or target formation. Sample any
new radar targets. You may periodically resample previous targets, as
you need more information about target maneuvering or the progress of
the intercept. Deciding which target/formation is of primary concern is
referred to as targeting.

Sort

Sorting is the process of determining how many aircraft are in a formation
(group) and the spatial relationships of the targets to one another. In
classic terminology “the sort” involves ensuring members of your
formation employ ordnance against different members of the target
formation. “The sort” is generally accomplished at a range that is
mutually understood by members of the attacking formation (and just
prior to employing ordnance).

SEARCH

Range-While-Search (RWS)

RWS is the most widely used search mode because of the variety of
available options (particularly medium, high and interleaved PRF) and

the flexibility of elevation bar and azimuth scan, 120/60 and 30 (search
sort).

e = AAIT/KID symbols @ Mode/BIT window
e Bearing range/bullseye e Sampled TGT
e Elevation coverage circles e EL coffin
e Digital altitude
e Digital elevation coverage e = Slow/fast cue
e Azimuth scan circles e Target symbology

e §6©Range limited TGT cues

D-9 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_16.jpeg:
RDR-05-06

Figure D - 7. Search Cues in RWS.

Initially, the aircrew should ensure that the briefed (or appropriate) long
range search (LRS) is selected (40 nm or 80 nm range, INLV, 6-bar
elevation scan, 120° azimuth scan). The aircrew sets the acquisition
symbols at the briefed/appropriate range (commonly 25 nm) and sets the
antenna elevation to provide the desired altitude coverage. If the bar scan
does not cover the required altitude, the aircrew must manually move the
antenna elevation. For example, if surface to 30,000 feet coverage is
required while the 6-bar elevation scan covers only 20,000 feet, the
aircrew can alternate coverage of surface to 20,000 then 10,000 to 30,000.
While using INLV, two frames (20 seconds if 6-bar/120° sweep) are
required before changing the antenna elevation. As the radar searches,
the aircrew can use AAI/EID to detect the presence of a target. If GCI
calls a target, maneuver the aircraft so the GCI reference is within the
azimuth search volume. Using the GCI provided information, the aircrew
can decrease the elevation bars and azimuth scan and select MED or HI
PREF (if appropriate) to help the radar find the target more quickly.

RDR-5 D-10


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_17.jpeg:
Place the acquisition symbols at the GCI referenced (or AAI/EID) location
and center the elevation/azimuth coverage on the target location. Once
the radar target appears, even the search cues will provide a lot of
“sample information.”

Placing the acquisition symbols over the target provides a better idea of
target altitude (coffin and digital readout) and digital readouts of target
relative bearing/range and bullseye bearing/range. Further sample the
target, if desired, by entering a track mode, but regardless, when
returning to search, be sure to reset the search radar parameters.
LRS/SRS switchology will reset display range, elevation bar and PRF to
the memorized settings.

The aircrew must manually reset the azimuth sweep and reset the
altitude coverage by placing the acquisition symbol at the appropriate
range and resetting the antenna elevation.

As you review the search target symbology (Figure D-8) remember that
four radar hits are required for the radar to upgrade targets to vectored
track files.

HALF INTENSITY TARGET (OBSERVATION TGT) (1 HIT)

mmm FULL INTENSITY TARGET (CURRENT BAR) (2 HITS)
W HOT TARGET (2 HITS)

A. COLD TARGET (2 HITS)

= VECTORED TRACK FILE (4 HITS)

an VECTORED TRACK FILE (4 HITS)

RDR-05-07

Figure D - 8. Search Target Symbology.

D-11 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_18.jpeg:
Hot/Cold Search

mZ0

F
L
fe)
fe)
D
R
Cc
D

2 RGH

1 _W
G485 180-025
| | vs

RDR-05-08

Figure D - 9. Hot/Cold Search.

Hot/cold search (Figure D-9) is available in all normal search modes
(including TWS and highlight) except velocity search or TWS sort. In HI
search, only hot symbology is displayed and only for targets with greater
than 300 knots radial closure (Rc). Search cues available include:

e Available in RWS, RGH, VCTR, TWS, and Highlight
e N/Ain VS or TWS sort
e Symbology

e W »>11AA (and Re logic)

e A <7AA (and Rc logic)
e mi =8-10AA

RDR-5 D-12


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_19.jpeg:
In MED search or RGH, both hot or cold symbology is available and the
radial closure requirement is 200 knots (positive for hot symbology and
negative for cold symbology). In RWS and medium range missile (MRM)
selected with the FCP weapons select switch, upgraded TWS background
processing is available which can display upgraded hot/cold symbology in
the form of filled-in rectangles with short heading vectors, like TWS
nondesignated target symbols. If RWS, range gated high, or vector scan
search modes are entered from TWS or STT, the radar retains the TWS or
STT track files as background track files [the nondesignated
track-while-scan (NDTWS) symbology]. Up to 10 TWS background
targets can be displayed and are aged out using normal track file deletion
logic. In short, hot/cold search forces the radar to provide target heading
information faster than you might otherwise have it. Only two hits are
required for hot/cold symbology, but four correlated hits are required for
vectored rectangle symbology.

Range Gated High (RGH)

RGH is selected by boxing RGH at PB #7. It is designed to provide a
longer range all-aspect capability using smaller range bins and slower
scan rates than RWS for improved range resolution (even better than
MPRF RWS) and improved long range, all aspect tracking capability.
Overall, it is mechanized and utilized much like RWS (display ranges,
elevation bars, frame store, azimuth scans, target symbology, etc.) but
using a fixed PRF which is between RWS medium PRF and high PRF. It
works like MPRF, in that it provides both hot and cold target symbology.
Search cues and target symbology are like RWS (Figures D-7, D-8, and
D-9) except there is no range limited target capability. RGH ignores the
radar ground moving target reject (GMTR) setting and uses a fixed 88
knot beam notch (like GMTR HI). Range scale selections greater than 40
nm use HPRF-like power, long pulse and a 50°/second scan rate (for long
range detection). The 10 nm and 20 nm range scales use short pulse and
a 70° scan rate (for more accurate ranging and faster frame times for
maneuvering targets).

D-13 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: RDR-5E, April, 1996

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_20.jpeg:
High false alarm rates (birds) make RGH an undesirable mode at low
altitude, so by design, the radar exits RGH (to RWS INLV) below 4,000
feet AGL (and reenters RGH when above 4,500 feet AGL). Against frontal
targets, RGH has a shorter detection range than RWS-HI, but longer than
RWS-MED. Detection range against tail targets with opening velocity is
comparable to RWS-MED, but shorter against tail targets with no closure
(or opening velocity). RGH might be beneficial if the radar has high or
medium PRF malfunctions or against low aspect targets at longer ranges,
but generally its liabilities outweigh its advantages compared to RWS.

If RGH is selected and the aircrew selects TWS, the radar continues to use
the RGH waveform. If a track mode (STT, DTT) is entered with RGH
selected, the radar returns to RGH search when the radar exits track
(breaks lock or the aircrew mode rejects to search).

Velocity Search (VS)

VS is entered by “boxing” PB #8 on the radar display. It presents targets
in an azimuth/radial closure format, instead of the normal azimuth/range
format.

VS provides no target altitude or target range information. It is very
susceptible to false targets (birds) particularly at low altitude or with
look-down situations. The scope range is provided only for assessing radar
altitude coverage (at the acquisition symbol range), and both the altitude
coverage circles and digital altitude coverage are provided. Hot/cold
target symbology and AAI/EID capability are not available, nor is bullseye
bearing and range (BBR).

By locking the target, the aircrew can obtain track capability with an
allowable steering error (ASE) circle and steering dot that provide pure
pursuit steering (to put the target on the fighter’s nose). In VS track, no
other track information including weapons cues are provided. When the
radar is able, it will enter full STT and provide normal STT track and
weapons information. The aircrew needs to remember that with a return
to search from track entered from VS (even STT) the radar returns to VS.
If the aircrew desires RWS, they must manually select it.

RDR-5 D-14


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_21.jpeg:
Although VS provides only minimal target detection range improvement
over RWS-HI, VS track along with GCI provided target information
(range, heading, altitude) can aid in the successful employment of
weapons against a very high and fast target.

This concludes our discussion concerning searching for a target.
RWS-INLYV is the most useful and most used search mode because of its
flexibility and all aspect capabilities. RGH, VS and VCTR [see the RDR-6
workbook or TO 1F-F15E-34-1-1-1 (classified) for VCTR] are less flexible
and generally less useful except under special circumstances.

MODES USED FOR SAMPLING

Although a great deal of target information can be determined in the
search modes, particularly RWS, by tracking the target in the sample
modes the radar provides more accurate target information plus
additional target information in the forms of target altitude, true airspeed
(TAS), aspect, heading, intercept steering and weapons employment
information (the weapons employment zone or “WEZ”). Sample (track)
modes include STT, DTT, DTWS and highlight.

Single Target Track (STT)

The advantage of STT is that it provides the best, purest and most reliable
information to the aircrew (and to medium range missiles—
AIM-7/AIM-120). Its disadvantage is that it renders the radar (and the
aircrew) blind to any other targets, and is the mode most likely to provide
the target with the best cockpit warning. Figure D-10 shows the track
cues available in most track modes.

D-15 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_22.jpeg:
*

14 iV
G575 285-075 AT 25 SEC T1560

RDR-05-09

Figure D - 10. Track Mode Cues (STT).

e  Bearing/range and bullseye bearing range (BBR)
e To STT/PDT
e Target ID
¢ © /Xor multiple cues (ambiguity)
e Target info
e ALT/Vc/TAS/AA/HDG
e Acq symbol
e STT -in MRM only

e Multitarget cue (rectangle)

RDR-5 D-16


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_23.jpeg:
The acquisition symbol is available in all the track modes, but in STT it is
only displayed with MRM selected on the FCP weapons select switch. In
STT (MRM) the acquisition symbol allows the aircrew to bump out to
increase the range scale. In the other track modes the acquisition symbol
allows the aircrew to “bump” to change azimuth scan or range (in or out).

From STT, if the radar itself breaks lock or the aircrew returns to search,
last track data is displayed at the upper left of the grid scale, as altitude
and aspect (vice TAS, aspect and heading while in track). This last track
data is displayed for 10 seconds or until a track mode is entered,
whichever happens first. The new track data takes precedence over the
last track data. Whenever the radar exits track, the radar antenna
remains at the last track elevation until the aircrew manually moves the
elevation or returns it to level (FCP weapons switch to guns; RCP auto
acquisition switch forward or aft). An exit from STT to a search mode
clears the target. The radar must gather the information required to
display the previously tracked target (and any other targets) as
observation, confirmed, hot/cold, vectored track files or range limited
targets.

Track-While-Scan (TWS)

For a scanning radar, the target update data rate depends on the frame
time, which determines the time between consecutive illuminations of a
specific point in space. Tracking of several targets becomes largely a
matter of sorting target hits obtained in each radar frame and assigning
them to proper target tracks. These tracks form the basis of estimating
future target positions until the target data can be refreshed. The process
of tracking targets based on discrete radar information obtained while the
radar continues to scan a search volume is referred to as track-while-scan
(TWS) and is accomplished in the digital computer.

D-17 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_24.jpeg:
TWS offers the advantages of a hybrid search/track capability. In
nondesignated TWS the aircrew has the advantage of full range of motion
in azimuth and elevation of the selected TWS scan pattern. In designated
TWS (DTWS) the aircrew has the advantage of having the radar keep
track of a selected target [the primary designated target (PDT)], but the
aircrew has only limited ability to position the TWS azimuth scan pattern
and limited (and in some cases no) ability to position the TWS scan
pattern in elevation. TWS has less flexibility than RWS, because it
marries an elevation bar scan and an azimuth scan, rather than
elevation/azimuth being individually selectable by the aircrew. The
aircrew selected range, GMTR and PRF (including RGH) are utilized in
TWS, however the elevation bar setting is ignored until TWS is exited.
The TWS abbreviations can be confusing. “IT'WS” is understood as normal,
vice High Data (HDTWS). TWS and HDTWS can be nondesignated
(“ND’TWS/”ND”’HDTWS) although the “ND” is normally used only when a
distinction is required between nondesignated and designated TWS. TWS
and HDTWS can be designated (DTWS/DHDTWS). Finally, TWS sort can
be a submode of all the above (Normal/High Data - TWS Sort/HDTWS
Sort) and designated or nondesignated (TWS Sort, DTWS Sort, HDTWS
Sort, DHDTWS Sort).

TWS offers the following advantages:
e Multi target detection
e Multi target track (DTWS)
e Rapid target altitude sampling (DTWS)
e Possible reduced target RWR (vice other track modes)
e STT-like data on the Primary Designated Target (DTWS)

e Sets of scan volumes (elevation/azimuth): 2-bar/60°, 4-bar/30°,
6-bar/15°

e Plan view of target formations (DTWS)

e High data mode for maneuvering targets (HDTWS): 2-bar/30°
or 3-bar/30°

e Established track files beyond display range are maintained

e INLV PRF is mechanized based on display range in TWS or PDT
range in DTWS

RDR-5 D-18


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_25.jpeg:
TWS induces the following limitations:
e Track data is not STT (or DTT) quality

e Elevation/azimuth scan sets can limit search flexibility
(particularly in designated TWS)

e Slower AAI/EID capability versus STT/DTT (no AAI/EID
capability in Narrow—6-bar/15°)

e Susceptible to target maneuvering, particularly at closer target
range

TWS HOTAS

TWS can be entered from any search mode except VS, including visual
auto acquisition modes except guns search, and from any track mode
except VS track. If entered from a search mode, the radar enters
nondesignated TWS. If entered from a track mode, the radar enters
designated TWS (DTWS).

The following addresses TWS entry switchology:
e From search:

e miniraster (over space) + auto acquisition switch forward
enters HDTWS (forward < 1 second enters 3-bar/30°;
forward > 1 second enters 2-bar/30°)

e  miniraster + auto acquisition switch aft enters TWS

e From track (STT, DTT, or Highlight):

e auto acquisition switch forward enters DHDTWS
(< 1 second for 3-bar; > 1 second for 2-bar)
e auto acquisition switch aft enters DTWS

e InTWS:

e Auto acquisition switch forward selects HDTWS
(> 1 second/< 1 second logic)

e 3-bar HDTWS and auto acquisition forward < 1 second
enters 4-bar/30° TWS

e Azimuth bump to 2-bar/60° TWS or 4-bar/30° TWS

D-19 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_26.jpeg:
Figure D-11 shows nondesignated TWS symbology, which can be
displayed in either designated or nondesignated TWS [the radar priority
target (closed star) is applicable to nondesignated TWS only].

The aircrew selectable frame store and elevation bar selection are not
used in TWS; the aircrew selected frame store and elevation bar setting
will be used when TWS is exited to other modes where they are used.

Half intensity observation targets are deleted if they do not receive
another hit within the next frame (4 to 5 seconds) in TWS or three frames
(about 3 seconds) in HDTWS. Deletion of confirmed range (full intensity,
nonvectored symbols) occurs if an update does not occur within three
frames (6 to 8 seconds) in TWS or four frames (4 seconds) in HDTWS. For
observation or range only targets, there is no symbol flashing prior to
deletion.

Established vectored track file targets are deleted (if they are not
updated) using target range logic. Targets between 10 and 20 nm range
flash after 11 seconds, flash for 4 seconds and are deleted at 15 seconds.
Targets, at all other ranges flash after 6 seconds (for 4 seconds) and are
deleted at 10 seconds. The longer 15 second deletion times for 10 to 20 nm
range targets is for AMRAAM data link support and for maneuvering
target considerations.

Track files will not be generated beyond the selected range scale, but
existing track files will be maintained if the range scale is bumped to a
lesser range where they are not displayed. These range limited track files
will be maintained in accordance with the TWS track file update/deletion
logic. Remember, TWS does not automatically range in (or out) as the
target range changes (like STT does). The aircrew must bump the range
as required.

RDR-5 D - 20


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_27.jpeg:
RDR-05-10

Figure D - 11. Nondesignated TWS (NDTWS) Target Symbology.

m Up to 20 observation targets (1 hit)

e In addition to track files
e =§=©One-half intensity

m Confirmed range target (2 hits)
AY. Hot/cold (2 hits)

° Prior to vector status
° N/A in TWS sort

™ Up to 10 track files (4 hits)
Sampled track file
e Long heading vector
e = Altitude (except PDT)
e Nonstandard mach (< 0.4 M or = 1.1 M)

*% 1 RPT (NDTWS)

D-21 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_28.jpeg:
DTWS Symbology

DTWS target symbology (Figure D-12) is the same as NDTWS symbology
with the following exceptions. There is no radar priority target (RPT
closed star) in DTWS. Instead there is a primary designated target
(PDT—Open star). In DTWS there can be up to 7 secondary designated
targets (SDT—open box with long heading vectors). If DTWS is entered
from a track mode (STT, DTT) or Highlight the tracked target becomes
the PDT.

RDR-05-11

Figure D - 12. DTWS Symbology (Weapons
Employment Cues Deleted for
Clarity).

e ‘ 1x PDT (DTWS only)

e * Upto 7 SDT (DTWS only)

The aircrew can designate additional track files as SDT’s either manually
or using the auto designation feature by boxing auto at PB #10 on a TWS

radar display. The auto designation feature works only after the radar is
in DTWS.

RDR-5 D - 22


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_29.jpeg:
NDTWS to DTWS Switchology
The aircrew can enter DTWS from TWS (DHDTWS from HDTWS) by:
e Manually designating a track file Gncluding the RPT)

@ Quickstep (FCP coolie up/RCP castle depress < 1 second). The
RPT becomes the PDT.

NDTWS Versus DTWS

The advantage of NDTWS is that the TWS search volume can be
positioned to the radar elevation and azimuth limits. The disadvantage is
that any TWS targets (including the RPT) left uncovered will be lost if
they are not refreshed. The advantage of DTWS is that the aircrew
cannot move the search volume off the PDT. Obviously, the disadvantage
is that this limits the aircrew’s ability to position the TWS search volume.
AIM-120 AMRAAM launch requires DTWS; the missile is launched to the
PDT. Another advantage of DTWS is that via quickstep (less than one
second) the aircrew can step (range order) among the SDT’s making each
one the PDT, in turn. As the PDT is stepped to each SDT, the target and
missile information on the DTWS display is applicable to the current PDT.
Hence, the SDT’s can be quickly sampled for desired information.

TWS auto designation follows this logic:
e Auto appears at PB #10 when TWS is entered
e Itis unboxed at radar power up
e Itis nonfunctional until at least one target is designated

e Ifboxed, once DTWS is entered, up to seven track files will be
automatically designated

e Ifthe PDT (or any SDT) is manually undesignated, it will
remain undesignated until manually redesignated (or AUTO is
unboxed, then boxed again). The manual undesignating
switchology is (with the acquisition symbol over the target) FCP
boat switch aft/RCP castle switch left.

D - 23 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-AIR RADAR

COVER

AIR-TO-AIR RADAR EMPLOYMENT

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your primary guide in studying F-15E air-to-air radar
employment. It contains background information essential for the
classroom session. It familiarizes you with the description, nomenclature,
and operational characteristics of the system, and operational
considerations for its employment.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeecceesseeeesneeceseeeeesaeecesaeeeessaeeessaeeessaeesessaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).............eeeeseeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
CEE os ses sans sos cores nos nas ois cua cares canis ans as RSA SNS Onis aU KUNE kK NewS SHES KoRKG MU NaS HSS aUD KR D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ ou. ececcccesseeecesneeceesaeecesacesensaeecesaeeseseeeenaees E-1
(ina) F-1

A-1 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_30.jpeg:
TWS Cues

In addition to the target symbology (observation targets, confirmed range
targets, hot/cold targets, track files, RPT, PDT, SDT’s) much of the same
type information available in RWS is available in TWS. (Figure D-12).

RDR-05-12

Figure D - 18. Nondesignated TWS (NDTWS) Target Symbology.

The digital altitude search volume is shown at the elevation coverage
circles, rather than at the acquisition symbol. A sampled target provides
an elevation coffin and the digital target altitude/ nonstandard mach on
the left and right of the acquisition symbol, respectively. (The PDT
altitude is displayed at the elevation caret, and is not displayed at the
acquisition symbol, when the PDT is sampled.)

In NDTWS, the BRA and BBR use search logic; both are to the acquisition
symbol. In DTWS the BRA and BBR are to the PDT.

RDR-5 D - 24


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_31.jpeg:
DTWS Elevation Control

In 2- or 3-bar DTWS the radar antenna elevation is locked to the PDT; the
aircrew has no control of the radar elevation.

In 4- or 6-bar designated TWS, full elevation deflection of the elevation
control up or down centers the PDT between the bottom two bars or top
two bars. While biased, a “U” or “D” replaces the selected elevation scan
in the BIT window (UTWS) to alert the crew to the up or down bias.
While biased, full deflection of elevation control returns the elevation scan
to normal logic by centering the target in the TWS elevation bar scan.
Selecting a new PDT also removes the bias. The elevation coverage circles
and digital altitude coverage change to reflect the up, down, or centered
elevation scan. When the radar determines that a TWS target is
approaching the vertical limits of the search volume, an up or down caret
will be displayed at the target location to tell the aircrew which way to
bias the search volume in an attempt to reacquire the target.

TWS Search Volumes and Parameters

The TWS search volume sets (2-bar/60°, 4-bar/30°, 6-bar/15°) and two
HDTWS sets provide volumes to quickly accommodate various formations,
particularly as formations close in range and greater altitude coverage is
needed. The FCP weapons select switch or RCP castle, when used to
select LRS/SRS parameters, do not change the TWS range. They do not
change the TWS elevation bars (but change the displayed setting). They
do function in changing the PRF to the LRS/SRS memorized settings.

TWS Elevation Coverage

Remember the previous discussion concerning altitude coverage in RWS:

>40 RANGE 20 RANGE 10 RANGE
2-bar 350 ft/nm 500 ft/nm 600 ft/nm
4-bar 600 ft/nm 1000 ft/nm 1300 ft/nm
6-bar 800 ft/nm 1600 ft/nm 2000 ft/nm

D - 25 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_32.jpeg:
While RWS varies the bar spacing for different range scale (1°, 2.5°, 3.4°),
TWS uses 1.5° bar spacing on all range scales, which provides the
following altitude coverages:

2-bar/60° 400 ft/nm ( 4°/nm)
3-bar/30° 500 ft/nm ( 5°/nm)
4-bar/30° 700 ft/nm ( 7°/nm)
6-bar/15° 1000 ft/nm (10°/nm)

At the target ranges that TWS is normally employed, a 40 nm range scale
is generally used. TWS provides about 15 to 25 percent more altitude
coverage than 40 nm RWS.

TWS provides the ability to rapidly transition among established search
volumes. If targets maneuver outside the current TWS search volume,
the aircrew can quickly and easily select a more suitable search volume by
azimuth bumping between 30° and 60° TWS, by “designating NARROW”
in the BIT window to enter 15° TWS or by using HOTAS to select HDTWS
(2- or 3-bar/30°).

High Data TWS (HDTWS)

HDTWS provides a 2- or 3-bar/30° scan pattern with a 65° per second scan
rate in all range scales which results in a one second frame time. The fast
frame time provides faster target updates, and therefore better capability
for maneuvering targets. The 2-bar 1.5° bar spacing provides 4° of
elevation coverage, the same as 2-bar/60° normal TWS, which gives us 400
feet per nm of altitude coverage, or about 8,000-12,000 feet at usual sort
ranges.

You will remember the switchology—entering TWS, auto acquisition

switch forward enters HDTWS (vice aft for TWS). As with TWS, auto
acquisition switch aft enters STT on the RPT or PDT.

RDR-5 D - 26


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_33.jpeg:
Dual Target Track (DTT)

DTT (Figure D-14) is really more applicable to the shoot phase than the
sampling phase. It was originally envisioned as a capability for employing
AIM-7 missiles at multiple targets. Once tested, it was found to be
incapable of providing enough information to the missiles at end game and
was subsequently fielded as an AIM-120 only mode. The aircrew enters
DTT by redesignating an SDT (for > 1 second) in any DTWS mode. DTT
does not scan, in the normal sense. It simply alternates a miniraster
between the two targets (the PDT and SDT). It can track targets
separated by as much as 45° in azimuth and 30° in elevation. The radar
will only see additional targets if they are inside the scan volume of one of
the minirasters. If the spacing between the two targets exceeds the DTT
limits (45° in azimuth or 30° in elevation) the radar exits DTT to DTWS
on the PDT. The aircrew can exit DTT as follows:

e Undesignate a DTT target - to DTWS with the remaining DTT
target as the PDT

e Auto acquisition switch forward - DTWS
e Auto acquisition switch aft - STT on PDT

e Mode reject (or designate space) - selected search mode

( CHAN Dt
35

450 17L_180

uoormn

08
4
16

RDR-05-13

Figure D - 14. Dual Target Track.

D-27 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_34.jpeg:
SANITIZE RWS

The only pure sanitize mode is RWS INLV, 120° scan and set to cover the

appropriate area of responsibility in altitude. Other modes, such as TWS

(particularly nondesignated TWS) and Highlight, offer some capability to

accomplish a degree of sanitizing, while the aircrew is performing another
radar task, but these modes should not be used, as a matter of course, for

sanitizing.

Highlight

Another of these multifunctional hybrid modes is highlight. The
advantage of highlight over TWS is that the altitude and azimuth scans
are individually selected by the aircrew, rather than mechanized in sets,
asin TWS. The major disadvantage of Highlight is a slow refresh rate
which induces inaccuracies in the track information.

Figure D-14 shows the switchology to enter highlight. No weapon
employment cues are provided until the target is upgraded to a track file.

G485 327-17
| RGH | vs

RDR-05-14

Figure D - 15. Highlight - No Track File.

RDR-5 D - 28


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_35.jpeg:
Entry to Highlight

e From RWS/MRM only

e = Acq on target

e Quickstep (< 1 sec)

Track data/symbology/cues

° TWS-like

Figure D-16 shows Highlight once the highlighted target has upgraded to
a track file and weapons employment cues are displayed.

CHAN A5
17R_260

F
L
(e)
{e)
D
R
Cc
D

iV

I I
G485 327-17

Ne

T 465
[ENTER yy

a

y,

Figure D - 16. Highlight With a Track File Target.

With track file

e MRM weapons cues (except)

° No ASE circle/dot

e No shoot cue
e No break X

Up to 9 “TWS’ targets

RDR-05-15

RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_36.jpeg:
In essence, entry into highlight forces the radar to work harder to achieve
vector status (a track file) on the highlighted target. It performs as many
minirasters as required to achieve vector status (four updates). On initial
entry, if vector status is not achieved after 7.5 seconds, the highlight
attempt is aborted and the radar returns to RWS. Note that highlight can
only be entered from RWS with MRM selected on the FCP weapons select
switch.

While in highlight, the radar scans the aircrew selectable search volume.
If the highlighted target is not updated during the regular search scan,
the radar enters the miniraster as necessary to update the highlighted
target. The highlighted target and up to nine additional track files can be
displayed. Azimuth bumping is normal and the acquisition symbol
returns to the highlighted target. Highlight is exited to RWS if MRM is
exited, if the radar range is bumped to less than the highlighted target
range, or if the aircrew selects a search mode other than RWS. As the
radar enters search, no last track data is provided, and the radar targets
are maintained. The aircrew can enter RWS with mode reject, high data
TWS with auto acquisition forward, normal TWS (not STT) with auto
acquisition aft, or STT with manual lock on.

In summary, highlight can be used to get TWS-like information, including
target track data while searching a flexible search volume. Like TWS it
may deny RWR information. Highlight can be used to sample and search
with WEZ information to determine when to enter a weapons employment
radar mode. In highlight, AMRAAMs employ as a visual launch and
AIM-7s go FLOOD. Do not shoot from highlight. AAI/EID is available in
highlight.

SORTING

You will remember that sorting is the process of distinguishing individual
targets within a formation. The final sort is the process of entering a
track mode on a particular target for weapon employment on that target
(STT/PDT).

Sorting is often a compromise between maintaining big picture SA with
sufficient search volume to encompass the targeted formation (including
maneuvering targets) and consideration for fast frame time for quick
updates on maneuvering targets and radar time on target, sufficient to
break out closely spaced targets in azimuth.

RDR-5 D - 30


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_37.jpeg:
Sorting can be accomplished from search modes like RWS and RGH, and
from hybrid search/track modes like TWS. RWS, medium PRF with 60°
azimuth scan and the smallest elevation scan practical for the tactical
situation is the most commonly used option. This discussion will cover the
search sort and TWS sort modes.

Search Sort

4MED

OQ __j 1 © 14
G485 180-025 T 465
| ENTER

RDR-05-16

Figure D - 17. Search Sort.

Sort (Figure D-17) can be entered from all search modes or STT with the
action switch (FCP TDC or RCP trigger for > 1 second). Sort is entered
with a return to search from the visual auto acquisition modes (except
auto guns) or with a return to search from STT or flood, but only if these
modes were entered from sort. Sort entry from scanning modes initializes
the 30° scan centered at the acquisition symbol. Entry from STT
initializes the 30° scan centered at the STT target.

D-31 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_38.jpeg:
The scan is space stabilized so that as the aircraft turns, the scan
continues to search the same airspace volume rather than the same
relative bearing from the aircraft. If the scan pattern becomes antenna
azimuth limited, it remains there as azimuth bump does not occur. The
30° scan is aircrew slewable at all times and an aircrew initiated azimuth
bump causes entry to 60° search.

10 MILE RANGE SCALE 40 MILE RANGE SCALE

8-BAR 4-BAR

- NORMAL 3.4° BAR SPACING - 1.5 TO 2.5° BAR SPACING
- 26° ELEVATION COVERAGE -7TO 10° ELEVATION COVERAGE
- 5 SECOND FRAME TIME - 2.5 SECOND FRAME TIME

80/160 MILE
RANGE SCALE

6-BAR 2-BAR

20 MILE RANGE SCALE

- NORMAL 2.5° BAR SPACING - NORMAL 1° BAR SPACING
- 15° ELEVATION COVERAGE - 3.5° ELEVATION COVERAGE
- 3.5 SECOND FRAME TIME - 1 SECOND FRAME TIME

RDR-05-17

Figure D - 18. Sort Logic.

Where TWS marries elevation bars to azimuth scans, search sort marries
elevation bars to range scale selections (Figure D-18). A weapon select
switch change or rear cockpit long range search/short range search change
will change the PRF and range scale, but sort mode continues to use its
own elevation scan logic, rather than that programmed against the
switches. Once in the sort mode, the aircrew can override sort mode’s
elevation logic with a manual elevation bar change, but a subsequent
range scale change will reinitialize the sort mode elevation scan logic
(based on the new range scale). Note that the bar spacing and elevation
coverage on a 40 nm range scale is dependent on acquisition symbol
placement (another reason to put the acquisition at the range, or
suspected range of the target).

RDR-5 D - 32


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_39.jpeg:
Sort can be exited to the selected search mode, to TWS, to STT, or to the
visual modes with the same logic as from normal 120° or 60° search.
Azimuth bump in sort enters the 60° azimuth scan, in the selected search
mode.

Search sort is compatible with RWS, RGH and velocity search.

SORT (AT 25 NM) | ALT COVERAGE FRAME TIME
a
60° RWS 2-BAR 8800 1.8 SEC

30° SORT 2-BAR 10,000 0.9 SEC

60° RWS 4-BAR 14,000 3.6 SEC
30° SORT 4-BAR 20,000 1.8 SEC

RDR-05-18

Figure D - 19. Sort Considerations.

Let us look at some sorting considerations (Figure D-19). Consider sorting
at 25 nm ona 40 nm range scale. First, use the smallest practical
elevation bar to decrease frame time. One benefit of faster frame time is
that from a meld, hits and track files are achieved quicker (and so is
AAT/EID correlation).

Second, the faster frame time is optimum for maneuvering targets and
targets near the beam. Sort mode’s 30° azimuth scan provides one-half
the frame time of 60° RWS, for a given elevation bar setting. However,
frame time benefits of 30° azimuth scan are not realized if sort mode’s
mechanized 4-bar elevation scan is used. Four-bar sort provides about
20,000 feet of altitude coverage at 25 nm. If 10,000 feet of altitude
coverage is sufficient, manually input 2-bar and achieve the full benefits
of our 30° azimuth scan frame time. Sort does not use the dual sliding
window processing for determining target range. If using sort to break
out targets closely spaced in range, particularly at longer ranges, RWS
might be the better option.

D - 33 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the six S’s for success and the overall objective of each of
these tasks.

2. Identiy the aircrew selectable search parameters and search cues
available in RWS, RGH, and VS.

3. Identify the advantages and limitations of the radar modes used to
search (RWS, RGH, and VS).

4. Identify the mode entry/mode exit switchology, aircrew selectable
parameters, and logic for the radar modes used to sample (STT, TWS,
DTT, and highlight).

5. Identify the advantages/disavantages and operating logic of the radar
modes used to sort (search sort, TWS, and TWS sort).

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I A/A Radar Controls
A/A Radar Display
Radar Search Modes
Radar Special Modes
Track-While-Scan (TWS) Mode
Sort Mode
Hot/Cold Search Mode
A/A Radar Employment
Target Detection Phase
Target Acquisition Phase
(Manual Acquisition)
Track-While-Scan

RDR-5 B-1


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_40.jpeg:
Last, as with sorting from any other mode, use MED if the target is being
refreshed with MPRF. In INLV and a high aspect target, if the target is
being refreshed only on HPRF bars, the target will only be refreshed on
every other radar sweep (Figure D-20, left). If the target is being
refreshed on both MPRF and HPRF bars (Figure D-20, right), then use
MED for sorting because of its improved range resolution over HI.

RDR-05-19

Figure D - 20. HI Detection Only or HI/MED Detection.

TWS Sort

The target sorting capabilities of TWS can be enhanced by selecting the
TWS sort mode. The raw radar hit symbology is displayed under the TWS
symbology. Whenever the radar is in TWS, the “SORT” legend is
available at PB #9. The TWS sort capability is selected by boxing the
legend. While in TWS, the aircrew can select or deselect SORT as desired.
The last selection is maintained when TWS is exited and reentered. TWS
sort is compatible with other TWS logic (DTWS or NDTWS, and all TWS
scan patterns, including HDTWS). HOTAS switchology for selecting
TWS/HDTWS, TWS scan volumes, and designating/undesignated targets
generally follows normal TWS logic, but there are a couple of exceptions.
If the auto acquisition switch is moved aft in TWS, the normal logic is
entry into STT on the PDT or RPT. However, in TWS sort, the radar
enters miniraster at the acquisition symbol location, not STT. To enter
STT, the aircrew must place the acquisition symbol over the desired target
prior to moving the acquisition switch aft. The advantage is that the
aircrew can lock any TWS track file (not limited to the PDT in DTWS or
the RPT in NDTWS).

RDR-5 D - 34


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_41.jpeg:
SUMMARY

The designers of the APG-70 provided numerous modes, each with its own
capabilities. All the modes have characteristics which provide both
advantages and disadvantages. An advantage in one situation may be a
disadvantage in another situation. Your ability to use the appropriate
modes at the appropriate times for appropriate situations, quickly and
efficiently, is the essence of effective tactical radar employment. As you
proceed through the academics on air-to-air weapons, air-to-air
maneuvering and air-to-air intercepts, you will build on your
understanding of how to employ the APG-70 and the wealth of
information it provides, so that you can effectively execute your mission.

D-35 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_42.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-5 D - 36


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_43.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

involves gathering as much information as possible
about a particular radar target, including speed, heading, aspect
angle, and weapons employment information.

a. Search
b. Sample
c. Sanitize
d. Sort

Which radar search modes provide aircrew selectable elevation bar
settings and azimuth scan selections?

a. RWS, RGH, and VS
b. RWS and RGH only
c. RWS and VS only
d. RWS only

Which search mode(s) incorporate aircrew selectable GMTR?

a. All search modes
b. RWS and RGH
c. RWS with HPRF
d.

RWS with MPRF (MED/INLV)

Which search mode might be used if either high or medium PRF is
malfunctioning to provide an all-aspect as well as a long range
detection capability?

a. RWS, interleaved PRF
b. RGH

c. VS

d. VCTR

E-1 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_44.jpeg:
5. Following an aircrew mode reject or if the radar breaks lock from

, the radar target(s) are maintained. The radar does not

have to rebuild the target.

po op

any track mode (STT, DTT, TWS, Highlight)
STT and Highlight only

any track mode except STT

any track mode except STT or DTT

6. Which of the following is/are advantages(s) of TWS?

po op

Multitarget detection and track.

Rapid transition among azimuth/elevation scan sets.
Rapid target sampling among multiple targets.

All of the above.

7. Aquick way to enter DTWS from NDTWS is to designate the radar
priority target (RPT) by quickstepping using the

ao op

FCP coolie switch/RCP castle switch.
FCP TDC/RCP hand control trigger.
auto acquisition switch forward.
auto acquisition switch aft.

8. Which radar mode automatically selects an elevation bar scan based
on range scale selection?

a. HDTWS
b. TWS sort
c. search sort
d. narrow (15° TWS)
9. TWS sort
a. isnot compatible with HDTWS.
b. displays raw radar returns under TWS symbology.
ce. isonly available in DTWS.
d. isonly available in NDTWS.

RDR-5

E-2


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_45.jpeg:
acq

AGL

AIM

AMRAAM

ASE

BBR

BCN

BIT

BRA

CBT

DTT

DTWS

EID

FCP

GCI

GMTR

HDTWS

HI

GLOSSARY
Air-to-air interrogator
Aerial attack maneuvering
Air-to-air weapons
Acquisition (symbol)
Above ground level
Air intercept missile
Advanced medium range air-to-air missile
Allowable steering error
Bullseye bearing and range
Beacon
Built-in test
Bearing, range, altitude
Combat (or computer based training)
Dual target track
Designated track-while-scan
Enhanced identification
Front cockpit
Ground controlled intercept
Ground moving target reject
High data rate track-while-scan

High pulse repetition frequency

RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_46.jpeg:
HOTAS Hands on throttle and stick

HPRF High pulse repetition frequency
INLV Interleaved pulse repetition frequency
IPRF Interleaved pulse repetition frequency
LRS Long range search

MED Medium pulse repetition frequency
MPRF Medium pulse repetition frequency
MRM Medium range missile

NDHDTWS Nondesignated high data rate track-while-scan
NDTWS Nondesignated track-while-scan

nm Nautical miles

PDT Primary designated target

PRF Pulse repetition frequency

RCP Rear cockpit

RDR Radar

RGH Range gated high

RPT Radar priority target

RWS Range while search

RWS-H Range while search - high

RWS-I Range while search - interleaved
RWS-M Range while search - medium

RDR-5 F-2


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_47.jpeg:
SDT

SRS

STT

TAS

TO

VCTR

VS

WEZ

Secondary designated target
Short range search

Single target track

True airspeed

Technical order
Track-while-scan

Vector scan

Velocity search

Weapon employment zone

RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_48.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read the Dash 34 references.

C-1 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

RDR-5 C-2


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

INTRODUCTION

The F-15E’s APG-70 radar is one of its most useful and versatile
capabilities. After all, they once built a light gray aircraft, very similar in
appearance to the F-15E, just to carry the APG-70’s grandfather (the
APG-63). The APG-70 supports a myriad of capabilities:

Instrument trail departures and recoveries

Radar trail formations beyond visual ranges (like night low
levels)

Rendezvous with other aircraft, whether it be a wingman
rejoining with his leader, a tanker rendezvous for air refueling
or marshaling with a strike package

Distinguishing one aircraft from another (including friendly/
hostile aircraft via AAI/EID capabilities)

Monitoring air-to-air weapons parameters against an adversary
and the required information to position the F-15E to a desired
positional advantage and weapons employment zone (WEZ)

Provides information to A/A missiles, including (but not limited
to) location of the target

From the original APG-63 to the current APG-70, the F-15’s radar
capabilities and its flexibility have been continuously improved. As you
study the F-15E/APG-70, you will understand that the designers really
have mechanized the system so that you, the aviator, can achieve the
desired outcome for the tasks at hand.

D-1 RDR-5


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_8.jpeg:
RADAR TASKS AND RADAR MODES

The APG-70 has a variety of search, track and hybrid (search and track)
modes. The use of these modes (when and how) is both situation and
aircrew preference dependent. Figure D-1 suggests which modes are
appropriate for which tasks. The assignment of modes versus tasks is
certainly open to debate. For example highlight could easily be argued as
a sample or sanitize capability and high data rate track-while-scan
(HDTWS) could be argued as providing both sample and sort capabilities.
We will return to this matrix later. But first, consider some APG-70
mechanization factors that influence the strengths and weaknesses of the
various modes and how you can influence the modes.

SEARCH | SAMPLE | SANITIZE | SORT SHOOT | SHOOT | RANGE

RWS RWS (H/M/)) /M/1) RWS —Rwsi RWS RWS (Mm) RWS RWS (mM) |

RGH HIGHLIGHT =| HIGHLIGHT SORT AUTO GUNS

vs TWS (ND) TWS SORT Ss

TWS (D)
HDTWS

DTT

RDR-05-04

Figure D - 1.

Frame Time

Frame time determines how quickly the radar can gather information
about a target, process the information, declare the target, and then
refresh its understanding of the target. Frame time is determined by the
azimuth scan rate (mode dependent), azimuth scan width, and the
number of elevation bars. Generally, scan rate aside, the larger the
volume of airspace the radar searches, the longer the frame time.

Larger search volumes (longer frame time) must be used when target
location is unknown, or not well-known.

RDR-5 D-2


Text from RDR-5_Air-to-Air_Radar_Employment_page_9.jpeg:
When the target location is better defined (AAI/EID symbology, GCI
information, etc.) smaller search volumes can be used to provide quicker
target detections (and faster AAI/EID). For longer range targets
(particularly small radar cross section targets) modes which provide
slower scan rates (longer “dwell time”) may provide earlier target
detection. At close ranges, smaller search volumes and faster scan rates
increase the number of radar “hits” versus time so that the radar, and
aircrew, are more aware of target maneuvering. For breaking out
separate, closely spaced targets during sorting, small search volumes and
slow scan rates are beneficial, but the search volume and scan rate must
also accommodate possible target maneuvering. Figure D-2 shows frame
times considering radar modes (scan rates) and search volume (azimuth
scan and elevation bars).

MODE RANGE | AZIMUTH FRAME TIME
SELECTED SCALE SWEEP (PER BAR)
RWS-M /1 10/20 120 #60
RWS-M /l 40/ 80/160 120 #60
RWS3-H ALL 120 #60

RGH 10/20 120 #60 1.7/0.9
m 40/ 80/160 120 #60 2.5/1.2

ALL 120/60 1.7/0.9

10/20 1.3 (PER FRAME)
10/20
40/80/1460
ALL
ALL

SORT 10 (8 BAR)
SORT 20 (6 BAR)

SORT 40 (4 BAR)
SORT [80/160 (2 BAR

Figure D - 2. Search Frame Time.

RDR-05-01

D-3 RDR-5


