Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-10
LOW ALTITUDE AIR-TO-AIR
EMPLOYMENT

JULY 1998
(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_10.jpeg:
Loss of two-ship visual mutual support significantly increases the threat
to the trailing aircraft. Since the flight is confined to a predictable flight
path, ground threats are forewarned when the lead aircraft passes by,
expecting the wingman to pass the same area. Airborne threats are able
to attack the trailing aircraft and remain unseen by the leader. In low
threat areas, wedge is a good option for flexibility of employment and ease
of maneuver. While flying wedge formation, tactical airspeeds must be
adapted to terrain. In other words, 450-500 knots (KCAS) may be too fast
when flying over rough mountainous terrain. Do not get slower than 350
(KCAS)! This gives a small turn radius and an acceptable turn rate while
maintaining the ability to abort the route vertically, if necessary.
However, close attention is required to avoid airspeed bleed-off during
repeated maneuvering.

Airspeed

Airspeed response to throttle adjustments is quicker at low altitudes than
at medium/high altitude. In standard tactical formation, 450-500 KCAS is
probably the best operating airspeed to provide offensive and defensive
maneuvering potential. If the goal is to avoid the threat, consider higher
speed (500-600 KCAS). Realize however, that aircraft deceleration is poor
above 500 KCAS, is better from 500-450 KCAS, and is excellent below 450
KCAS. At airspeeds above 500 KCAS, turn radius increases significantly
and speed brake extension is minimal, due to air loads. Full speed brake
extension is available below 450 KCAS. The low altitude step down
training (LASDT) acceleration/deceleration (ACCEL/DECEL) maneuver
will emphatically demonstrate this. On SA-1, carriage, employment and
jettison limits for external stores become a concern. The bottom line is
this: while “speed is life” continues to be a means for survival in a high
threat area, slowing down to a better maneuvering airspeed to counter a
threat requires quick response and close monitoring of aircraft
parameters.

AAM-10 D-4


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_11.jpeg:
Turns (Line Abreast)

Low altitude, comm-out turns may be signaled by a wing flash and
accomplished similarly to medium/high altitude turns (without vertical
maneuvering). At low altitude, however, the wingman must spend a lot of
time crosschecking ground clearance and may miss wing flashes from the
leader. This particular problem can be minimized by well coordinated
crew lookout responsibilities.

A second method of turning a flight uses a combination of check turns to
initiate and control the turns; wing flashes are not used. To turn away
from the wingman, the leader abruptly turns 30° and then rolls out. The
wingman recognizes this as a turn command and immediately initiates a
90° toward the leader. As the wingman passes through his 6 o’clock
position, the leader completes the turn he has started (Figure D-8).

AAM-10-03

Figure D - 3. Turn Away from the Wingman.

D-5 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_12.jpeg:
A turn into the wingman is accomplished the same way, except that the
leader rolls into the turn and completes it in one maneuver. The
wingman, upon seeing lead turning toward him, check turns 30° away
from lead. The wingman completes his turn (using visual references)
when lead passes through his 6 o’clock (Figure D-4).

Ye -

Figure D - 4. Turn into the Wingman.

Remember aircraft response and energy sustainability is better at low
altitude; so, tighter radius turns are normally flown. Thus, less time is
required to complete the turn, and aircraft planforms are not highlighted
as long. Also, the second aircraft to turn must wait longer than at
medium/high altitude before initiating the turn.

With the aircraft under high Gs, flying through jet wash may result in an
over-G and/or control problems. It is best to cross above jet wash rather
than through it. If jet wash cannot be avoided, passing through it as close
to 90° as possible with minimum aircraft loading minimizes the effects.

AAM-10 D-6


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_13.jpeg:
In rough terrain, reduced lateral spacing may be necessary to prevent loss
of visual. The aircrew must remain aware of the proximity of the ground
and the lack of vertical turning room available below the aircraft.

The pilot must make terrain the major emphasis in his cross check,
devoting every other look-out to it, while adjusting formation position and
altitude. The pilot must allow enough cross-check time to adequately
accomplish the following required tasks: formation, avoid the terrain and
deconflict flight paths (especially during turns). Timing of turn initiation
may also be the WSO’s call. Either of the two procedures described may
be used. The wingflash option allows for a single maneuver by element
members and is not constrained to set angular moves. The 30° check turn
option allows the flight leader to better control/monitor the flight.
Advantages and disadvantages of both procedures can be adapted to flight
experience and tactical necessity.

CREW COORDINATION

Because the F-15E is a “crew aircraft,” crew coordination often spells
success or failure of the mission. Crew coordination does not mean
constant intercockpit communication/discussion; that simply fills a
comm-jam square. On the other hand, crew coordination is not just “you
do your job, and I'll do mine.” At low altitude, it is imperative that both
crewmembers understand how mission priorities affect the task
loading/management of each crew member. In this way, tasks can be
better shared making the overall task management much easier. Crew
coordination must not be “blown off” but rather, must be tailored to the
experience of each pilot/WSO, the mission, flight positions and personal
skill levels.

D-7 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_14.jpeg:
Terrain Avoidance

Terrain avoidance is obviously the number one priority of the crew while
employing at low altitude. Avoiding the rocks is the primary
responsibility of the pilot, but the WSO can assist with S.A. on terrain
awareness through advisory calls of upcoming terrain on the E-scope or
TSD. Crosscheck of the velocity vector in the HUD every 3-5 seconds at
low altitude should assure terrain clearance. While turning, this
crosscheck becomes vitally important. AGD-1 presents specific procedures
and factors to apply for best low altitude parameters and maneuvers.

Visual/Formation Position

This responsibility is really a shared item. It can normally be conducted
while working the visual lookout priorities already discussed. The WSO
must realize the pilot spends a great amount of attention looking forward
at the rocks, so he/she should give formation advisory/turn calls to the
pilot. The pilot must also crosscheck his formation position at a rate
sufficient to maintain the best position possible. In this way, visual
signals will not be missed and reactions to check turns or airspeed
changes will be quicker than if called exclusively by the WSO.

To coordinate actions, the pilot/(WSO should stipulate whether they are
“heads down” or “up,” and whether looking “outside” or “inside” the
formation. These calls can be further coordinated to be “by exception,”
meaning it is assumed the other person is visually looking outside the
aircraft, unless specifically stated he/she is “heads down.”

Turns

While turning at low altitude, the pilot may wish to select auto guns into
the direction of the turn. (Be aware of the chance it could lock the flight
lead.) Additionally, the pilot should have only momentary visual lookout
responsibilities while mainly avoiding the ground. The WSO should be
checking the flight's old 6 o’clock position if they are the first to turn. If
turning second, check the flight’s new 6 o’clock position. Additionally, the
WSO can advise the pilot on timing of this turn in relation to lead. During
roll out of the turn, transition smoothly to standard visual lookout and
WSO control of the radar.

AAM-10 D-8


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_15.jpeg:
Systems Operation

Before the flight even starts, individual crews must make certain
air-to-air tactical decisions. Which crewmember runs the air-to-air radar,
how and when to transition control, and personal techniques and
procedures must be thoroughly understood by the pilot and WSO. Actual
war is no time for personal feelings or ego to preclude effective mission
accomplishment. If the WSO is more adept at working complex radar
targeting problems, then he/she should be running it. However, if the
reverse is true, have a plan to “hand-off” the affected systems to the WSO
when formation or low altitude responsibilities preclude maximum
effective use of the system by the pilot. Use peacetime training to teach
each other best employment options—not combat.

After doing all this work and preparation for the air-to-air fight, do not
forget the basics at the merge. If jets start turning and BFM is required,
optimize the aircraft’s performance, the crew’s visual lookout and aircraft
systems such as the ALE-45. Correct BFM is paramount. If not
configured for an air-to-air mission, air-to-ground munitions on the jet
reduce maneuvering limits to 6.0-6.5 symmetrical G and 3.0-4.8 G
asymmetrical. Consider jettisoning tanks and/or bombs if getting slow
(<350-400 KCAS) and defensive. If offensive in a BFM fight, the WSO
should be monitoring the wingman, checking his six, and searching for
others trying to enter the fight. Additionally, the crew must coordinate
the dispensing of chaff and flares or they may risk dumping twice the
desired amount or dumping none.

The bottom line to low altitude air-to-air employment is that basic fight
principles must be understood and adhered to more strictly. Variations in
aircraft performance and proximity to the ground force the aircrew to a
more conservative and controlled employment in this arena if they want to
get the job done well.

D-9 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_16.jpeg:
EMPLOYMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Radar Set-Up

Use of the APG-70 at low altitude carries with it special considerations,
just as low altitude formation does. Detailed discussion is classified, but
certain basic facts about APG-70 operation at low altitude may be
addressed. Remember that at low altitude, the 044 Digital Radar Signal
Processor (DRSP) automatically gains down the radar detection capability
in relation to signal-to-noise ratio in an effort to filter out sidelobe
feedback and background noise. In essence, to avoid “seeing” noise coming
into the antenna, the radar increases the target detection threshold; thus,
a much stronger target return is required at low altitude. To get a
stronger return, a powerful signal must be transmitted through the main
lobe. Average peak power is highest in high pulse repetition frequency
(HPRF). In fact, the power advantage over medium PRF (MPRF) is quite
significant. HPRF must be utilized to achieve long range detection.

Selecting HPRF-only displays only high aspect targets. At 30+ miles this
may be fine, but bandits in the beam or tail aspect within 20 miles go
undetected with HPRF-only search. Only medium PRF detects these
bandits. For targets within 20 nm, signal-to-noise ratio for radar hits is
sufficiently strong in MPRF. So, the bottom line is use interleaved search
at low altitude to give both long range detection of hot targets and short
range detection of cold targets.

AAM-10 D-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_17.jpeg:
Consider these other radar setup techniques at low altitude:

e Frame store (FS): Wingmen should consider FS2 vs FS1. Track
files will build and still be on the scope while crosschecking other
low altitude priorities (watching the rocks, maintaining formation,
visual lookout, threat avoidance, etc.).

e Range scale: 40 or 80 nm scope. The APG-70 has excellent long
range capability. Use the long range search capability to provide
the option to work avoidance criteria or commit criteria as early as
possible. Remember, the job is to put ordnance on target and
survive while doing it. Early adversary detection will greatly
enhance this goal.

e Sweep scan: For maximum detection, a 120° sweep should initially
be selected. Once groups have been targeted, a 60° sweep may aid
in sorting.

Radar Search Plan

In two-ship formations, consider giving the wingman the high search
responsibility. Remember, the wingman has other priorities such as
formation responsibilities. The radar hits at medium/high altitude occur
farther out, do not hide in ground clutter, and maintain track files better
than low altitude contacts. The lead will then have the more difficult
avionics work, which should match his time availability/capability. Have
at least 2000 feet of search overlap at briefed acquisition symbol set
range. Twenty nautical miles is normally briefed, but terrain features
must be considered. If the planned route is over terrain that permits
terrain masking, then it is also lousy for detection of low altitude bandits
hiding behind ridges. Since visual lookout is more of a challenge during
turns, do not plan turn points immediately after a ridge crossing. The low
altitude radar search will not see the bandits on the other side. This
should be considered in premission planning.

D-11 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_18.jpeg:
Four-ship formations also need to divide the high/low radar search
responsibilities. There are two techniques for this: splitting high/low
search between the element leads (1-low, 2-high, 3-high, 4-low); or,
splitting it between the wingmen (1-low, 2-high, 3-low, 4-high).
Advantages to the leads splitting search are:

e Air-to-air targeting gives total picture between the element
communication.

e A wingman in each element “sees” the radar picture that the other
element is talking about on the radio.

A major disadvantage is that one of the wingmen is now responsible for
the more difficult radar search (#4 in this example). This has already
been identified as not optimum for wingman task loading. Advantages
and disadvantages of splitting search plans between the wingmen are the
opposite of the other technique. What works for a four-ship will be based
largely on wingman experience and ability, and expected adversary
ability/weaponry. For example, experienced wingmen are able to handle a
low altitude search reliably. If the threat is medium/high BVR shooters,
having an element lead with a high search becomes a big plus. Ifthe
threat is from an IR missile equipped bandit at low altitude, then both
leads should have low altitude search responsibility.

Visual Lookout

Clearing for air-to-air threats is one of the major tasks that occupy the
time of the F-15E aircrew. Paramount to survival and tactical
employment is developing a disciplined search pattern that is logical and
easy to gain proficiency in. Each crew must search the entire field of view
(FOV) around their aircraft with special emphasis on the briefed areas of
responsibility. The particular formation dictates the areas of
responsibility, including moving the aircraft to search blind spots (Figures
D-5 and D-6).

AAM-10 D-12


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_19.jpeg:
: \1B (PRIM)
\ 1B (SEC):

\ |

*. 2B (PRIM) i . 2B (SEC) /
| 5 7
a“
I 7

Figure D - 5. Wedge Primary Areas of Visual Search.

D-18 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E, its
systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be used in
conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and technical
manuals. If you find any differences between the material contained herein
and other governing regulations, adhere to the regulations and notify the
OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC 27531.

Supersedes: AAM-9, March, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_20.jpeg:
pp

9 2B (SEC): , 2B (PRIM) :

AAM-10-06

Figure D - 6. Line Abreast Primary Areas of Visual Search.

AAM-10 D-14


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_21.jpeg:
Do not concentrate lookout solely in the vicinity of the horizontal plane of
the formation. When searching a particular sector around the formation,
start level with the horizon; then, gradually move your search to the
extreme vertical above. While searching, begin at gun range (the most
immediate threat) and move outward to missile range. Try to focus on a
point on the horizon and look for movement. To check blind zones, using
check turns may enhance visual lookout at 6 o’clock. However, there is a
risk encountered when constantly presenting the aircraft planform
against the horizon, possibly giving an early tally to the enemy. A

30° turn using 3-5 Gs allows a check of 6 o'clock with minimal effect to
routing.

The flight’s area of responsibility for visual lookout should be prioritized
for survival. A good search of the flight's 6 o’clock is the first priority.
Next, move your scan through the wingman as discussed above. Visual
lookout to the forward hemisphere is necessary, but disciplined work with
the APG-70 should limit the amount of time you spend there. More
importantly, check outside of the formation prior to starting the search
pattern again. Although each wingman will be clearing through and
across the flight, the best chance of detecting threats outside the
formation is by the wingman on that side; this is due to the long distances
involved (lateral spacing of the formation plus the range of the threat).

HUD Use

Use of the HUD in the low altitude tactical arena is an excellent way to
maintain situational awareness of your parameters while still
maintaining “head-out” (a must when flying close to the ground). But, like
all instruments, it must be used as part of a cross-check, with the ground
the most important element of the check. Use of the velocity vector
provides a good level flight reference after initially rolling into a turn and
at timely intervals, throughout a turn.

D-15 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_22.jpeg:
Low Altitude Intercepts

General Considerations

As with all low altitude operations, awareness of the ground/terrain must
be the highest priority in the attacker’s crosscheck. Some specific
adjustments must be made for this factor.

Timing of maneuvers used in low/medium altitude intercepts is affected
by the smaller turn circles, which result from the greater air density at
these altitudes. Consequently, pure pursuit curve numbers change from:

15AA at 15 nm to 15AA at 8 nm
14AA at 10 nm to 14AA at 7 nm
13AA at 10 nm to 13AA at 6 nm

A much hotter intercept can be run at low altitude. Aspect angles and
pursuit curves must be adjusted for the relative speed of the bogey. Fuel
flow is greatly increased. Full afterburner can burn fuel at a greater rate
than the feed tanks can be replenished. A good rule-of-thumb is to get
airspeed in afterburner, and sustain it in military power.

Low-to-High Intercepts

Low-to-high conversions require evaluation of both vertical and horizontal
maneuvering room. The optimum maneuver is a chandelle, using both
vertical and horizontal offset, to a low 6 o’clock position on the target,
never leaving the blind zone. Obtaining a tally is not generally difficult
unless a large altitude delta is present. From a tally to a kill, basic fighter
maneuver (BFM) principles apply. Due to the nose-high entry, terrain
avoidance is less of a consideration. However, there are two situations
that deserve attention:

e Attempting to square the corner in the final conversion may result

in your being nose-high, slow and at low altitude. Accepting the
overshoot through the blind zone, with energy, is a better option.

AAM-10 D-16


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_23.jpeg:
e After operating at minimum altitudes, 2000 feet above ground
level (AGL) appears to be very high. It is an illusion that has
proved fatal to many good aviators on pop-up attacks and air-to-air
engagements with helicopters.

High-to-Low Intercepts

GCI, AWACS and the APG-70 enable detection of low altitude threats.
BVR rules of engagement simplify employment, but certain situations
dictate a conversion into the low altitude regime to employ weapons. Lost
radar locks due to gimbal limits or beam clutter, target terrain masking,
and camouflage, complicate a kill at low altitude. It is necessary to clear
the area around the target with the radar, as well as visually, to prevent a
sandwich. The high-to-low conversion at low altitude has some unique
differences from medium/high altitude conversions. Normally, an early,
aggressive turn gets much of the turn out of the way, which allows
concentrating on the target, rather than the ground, in the final part of
the conversion. Plan the conversion to end up slightly higher than the
target so an overshoot, if it occurs, does not result in ground impact.

To accomplish this conversion, get your tally on the target early (8-10 nm)
by aggressively pulling the TD box into the HUD and/or by canopy code
information. Once the target is in sight, discontinue pure pursuit as this
sacrifices all vertical turning room and requires a 2-dimensional “Square
Corner” to finish the corner slow. Rather, maintain several thousand feet
of vertical above the target, while your nose track keeps proper proportion
to the target's LOS. Turn hard above the target in a 2-dimensional POM
(can be slightly descending to preserve energy) until behind the 3/9 line of
the target.

Now the conversion can be finished by dropping the nose, gaining closure
and entering firing position while monitoring both the ground and the
target together. Airspeed advantage for a tail chase situation can be
achieved if some vertical separation is maintained in the final portion of
the intercept.

D-17 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_24.jpeg:
Co-altitude Intercepts

Problems encountered in the high-to-low intercept may still be a problem
with this type intercept. Terrain masking by the target is much more of a
problem, and dead reckoning the target's new position may be your only
option. The TSD can be used as an aid in predicting the target’s position
when LOS is broken. Radar employment over flat or slightly rolling
terrain should be effective. Finally, weapons employment is more of a
problem in low-to-low profile. Remember the pursuit curves for low
altitude intercepts, but adjust them for target speed.

Common Low Altitude Intercept Errors

e Intercepting a shadow instead of the target
e Failing to obtain a tally before the radar breaks lock

e Carrying too much airspeed, which increases turn radius, requires
more G, and is harder to slow down

e Starting conversion too late and encountering difficulty in
generating closing velocity at low altitude.

Conversion Aborts

The potential need to abort a conversion is a major concern in the
high-to-low intercepts. Avoid a pure high-to-low, “Split-S” type
conversion. Rolling more than 135° is not advised. Attempting a slice to
an altitude slightly higher than the target’s altitude precludes ground
impact. If dive recovery safety parameters are exceeded at any time, or
the conversion “feels” uncomfortable, roll wings level and recover. If
necessary use the emergency dive recovery procedures in the F-15EK Dash
1, or the low altitude dive recovery rules in the F-15E AFTTP 3-3.

High/Low Speed Targets

A faster target requires a colder intercept pursuit curve with enough offset
to prevent losing airspeed/energy in the final conversion turn. This
requires the aircrew to monitor the radar for closure and target true
airspeed and/or obtain target speed from AWACS/GCI. Low speed targets
require close monitoring of the closure and aspect angle to prevent
overshoots. Remember, the pure pursuit curve numbers, that were shown
earlier, apply to co-speed targets.

AAM-10 D-18


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_25.jpeg:
WEAPONS SELECTION

The increased air density at low altitude significantly decreases weapons
envelopes because of kinematics and missile seeker difficulty in picking
the target out of high ground clutter. Additionally, missile-to-ground
impact is a consideration for all missile attacks. All missiles attempt to fly
a pursuit curve (usually lead) that allows a collision course with 0° LOS to
the target. This means if the missile is launched with the target climbing,
the missile climbs toward the predicted impact point. It also means if the
missile is launched while the target is descending, the missile dives
toward the predicted impact point and may strike the ground en route.
With either IR or radar missiles, firing with a slight nose-high attitude
reduces ground impact problems. Flying low to achieve look-up (blue sky)
may improve seeker acquisition, but may also plant the first round in the
dirt 1000 feet at 12 o’clock, if the launch altitude is not sufficient for the
missile to attain flying speed prior to ground impact.

AIM-120

Given early radar detection, the AIM-120, with its long range capability,
usually presents the first shot opportunity at low altitude. The AIM-120
has features which provide flexible employment options. These features
include: off-boresight shot capability; all aspect, beyond visual range
(BVR) capability; and an active seeker which does not require continuous
radar illumination from the launch aircraft. These features permit the
launch aircraft to fire a good data link shot and, once the missile is active,
maneuver to use low altitude/terrain to hide and/or avoid any return
shots. At low altitude, missile time-to-active usually occurs soon after the
shot. Refer to AFTTP/AFTTP 3-1, Vol XVII.

D-19 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_26.jpeg:
AIM-7

At low altitude, AIM-7 launch parameters must meet seeker head
requirements and be adequate to ensure the missile does not impact the
ground while it is gaining flying airspeed following launch. There are
additional problems if the shooter must remain at low altitude during
missile launch and throughout missile time of flight (TOF). Unlike in the
AIM-120 case, following an AIM-7 launch, both the F-15E radar and
missile must maintain line of sight (LOS) with the target throughout
missile TOF. At low altitude, terrain features affect radar/missile
capability against a target changing his aspect angle in relation to the
shooter.

The same maneuvers required to keep a tally also preserve radar LOS,
but the altitude may be higher than required to deny an adversary shot.
Refer to AFTTP 3-1 for shot/kill criteria.

AIM-9

The AIM-9M maintains its all aspect capability at low altitude, but its
employment ranges are significantly decreased. It is very important to
ensure proper seeker track of the target at low altitude both with a visual
indication and the aural tone. Adverse background IR sources can drive
the seeker LOS off the target.

Gun

Employing the gun at low altitude requires controlling the same factors as
in medium/high altitude gun shots: range, lead and plane-of-motion
(POM). The last of these, POM, is even more important at low altitude
because the low altitude fight tends to be primarily two-dimensional.
Since POM is so close to the ground, any out-of-plane maneuver by either
the defender or attacker could be catastrophic. Lead pursuit can also put
the attacker in the position of having a terrain obstacle in his flight path
as he flies inside the defender's turn. Careful control of G, closure,
airspeed and relative position are necessary to achieve a tracking solution.
Wake turbulence when crossing the bandit's 6 o’clock position can also
cause out-of-plane problems. Continue to look for the missile shot.

AAM-10 D - 20


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_27.jpeg:
CONTINGENCIES
No Radar/Bad Systems

Before takeoff, there are certain minimum essential systems that must be
operational (go/no-go items). These include, but are not limited to: the
RADAR, INS, ICS/CMD, RWR, IFF/MODE IV, and weapons systems.
Once airborne, however, loss of any one of these systems may or may not
require a mission abort. This will depend on the flight lead’s briefed
tactical scenario and the point in the mission where the system fails. In
terms of low altitude air-to-air employment, loss of the radar will most
likely immediately dictate certain constraints. First, the sick-radar
aircraft now becomes the tactical wingman; and the other aircraft, if not
already the lead, assumes the tactical lead. Second, in any engagement,
the radar aircraft should assume he will have a support fighter, and
therefore, needs to ensure that the support fighter is visually tied to the
tactical lead. Finally, the aircrew with the good radar must provide as
much information as is tactically feasible to the other aircrew in terms of
an engaged plan, tactics, tallies, etc. If possible, avoidance of any threat is
probably the smartest option, unless mission requirements dictate
otherwise.

Group Targeting/Sorting

When operating at low altitude, it is still necessary to maintain the
targeting/sorting disciplines applicable to medium/high radar
employment. However, the minimum ranges at which these tasks are
accomplished within the flight can usually be reduced, due to reduced
ranges on weapon envelopes (reference AFTTP 3-1 Vol XVII). Group
targeting should be finished by 20-25 nm, with element sorting within
those groups accomplished NLT 15 nm from the merge. If using these
ranges for targeting/sorting, meld ranges must be briefed and complied
with due to high radar LOS rates on the shorter range radar displays.

Short Range Radar Contact/Commit

If a member of the flight achieves a short range (<15 nm) hostile lock-on
that is converting to the flight, immediate action is necessary. That
aircraft must maneuver to engage and call the “engaged” status. This
alerts the other aircraft who can then use the engaged aircraft as a
pointer for radar and visual acquisition. The engaged fighter should
immediately launch an A/A missile, if in parameters, while
simultaneously acquiring a tally. A combination of canopy-code references

D-21 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_28.jpeg:
and the HUD TD box should be used to acquire the bandit as quickly as
possible. This information should then be communicated to the flight.

Initially, this action could lend itself to pure pursuit of the bandit, but,
once tally is achieved, proper BFM maneuvering for weapons employment
should be used. The wingman should not, in most cases, maneuver into
the same POM as the engaged fighter, but should remain at low altitude
and maneuver to a support position. This gives the element a split-plane
BFM entry to the merge. At the merge, the flight can then either continue
to engage, or turn high aspect to a blow-through separation.

Element Targeted/Threat Reactions

If the RWR signals a BVR threat in the forward quadrant, some decisions
concerning offensive/defensive threat reaction must be made. If there is
no radar contact on the threat, an element maneuver to put the RWR
spike on the beam is the best move. Simultaneously, look for a tally of the
bandits and/or a missile in the air. On the other hand, if your element is
trading shots with the bandits, take full advantage of the range of your
missiles, shot doctrine, and F-pole maneuvers. If taking low altitude
Fox-1s and subsequent F-Poles, watch for the tendency to fly into a low
altitude terrain mask situation that prohibits radar LOS. Additionally,
the maneuvers utilized to avoid terrain may inadvertently gimbal the
radar lock. These problems can be encountered when using simple
avoidance maneuvers as well. Remember, the wingman on the outside of
the formation in relation to the threat will lose radar situation awareness
(SA) sooner than the lead. Refer to AFTTP 3-1 Volume XVII for Low
Altitude AIM-120 Tactics.

If notching a bandit, start at 12-10 nm, depending on the threat, using
both radar and RWR information to determine what initial heading will
put the threat on the beam. Once the bandit is on the beam, perform an
arc much like is done when arcing a TACAN on an instrument approach.
Since the bandit will be traveling 8-10 nm/minute, it will take 60 seconds
for the merge to occur. Two methods work well to maintain the beam
maneuver. The first method is to check 10° back toward the bandit every
5 seconds. After 35-40 seconds (70-80° total turn), it is time to do an idle
power break into the bandit that has been visually acquired. The other
method is similar to the first but calls for a 10° check into the bandit after
10 seconds, then 9 seconds, then 8, etc... when you get to 5 seconds (70° of
total turn) it is time to break into the threat. The break maneuver should
be performed 2-4 nm from the bandit which will permit a high aspect
merge with the bandit and an opportunity to disengage. Since avoiding
the beam IR-missile shot from the converting bandit is important, an

AAM-10 D - 22


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_29.jpeg:
early tally and effective IRMD is required. Refer to AFTTP 3-1 Volume
XVII for an expanded discussion of all-aspect and IR missile defense
tactics.

Stern Threat

Another situation requiring low altitude consideration is a bandit acquired
at the element's 6 o'clock position, attempting to run down the element to
weapons employment. Once acquired, the flight should select afterburner
and attempt to pull away. Simultaneously, a “float” can be
called/executed by the element. This maneuver is a 20-30° check turn by
each aircraft, away from his wingman, causing diverging flight paths.

The trailing bandit is now forced to make a positional decision as the
element separation gets wide (2-3 nm). Ifthe trailing bandit decides to
continue trailing the element member, this gives a turning entry to the
wingman (Figure D-7).

AAM-10-07

Figure D - 7. Stern Threat Contingency.

D - 238 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

= ae
4 O
¥ o\p_ a rere ere

)

—_=

—an/
DG ;—_

COVER

LOW ALTITUDE AIR-TO-AIR EMPLOYMENT
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with air-to-air employment
in the low altitude environment. It provides a study and reference source
for basic tactical procedures in this regime. It deals with issues vital to
understanding your aircraft, safe operations, and wartime capability when
close to the ground.

CONTENTS:

INT RODDLUC PION sc case sae sus anes cose anes sane anus suis nase ans sans aus ouch sens ans wants aa ace os A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............ eee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. eee C-1
TEXT oc eececccceeesneeeceessseeeceeesseeeccesssaeeeceessaeeeceesssaeeeseeeeaeeesenenaes D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo... eeccceeenecceseecessneecesaeesesaeeessaeesensaeeens N/A
GLOSSARY 00. eeeccceeeneeesneeecesaceeesaeecesaeeeessaeesesaeesesaeeseesaeeseeaaeeeseas F-1

A-1 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_30.jpeg:
If the bandit decides to stay between the element, they can now usually
break back into the bandit for a mini-pince when their lateral separation
gets to approximately 4 nm (Figure D-8). Refer to AFTTP 3-1 Volume
XVII for further discussion on this topic.

AAM-10-08

Figure D - 8. Stern Attack Inside the Element.

AAM-10 D - 24


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_31.jpeg:
Other Contingencies

Other situations that should be briefed but are more mission dependent
include:

e lost contacts

e blind wingman

e low fuel

e battle damage/wounded bird
e F-15 losses

e abort criteria

e winchester missiles

e ALE-45 use/programming

e surface-to-air threat reactions

D-25 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_32.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-10 D - 26


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_33.jpeg:
BFM

BVR

DRSP

FOV

HPRF

KCAS

LASDT

LOS

MPRF

POM

TOF

GLOSSARY
Basic fighter maneuvers
Beyond visual range
Digital radar signal processor
Field of view
High pulse repetition frequency
Calibrated airspeed in knots
Low altitude step down training
Line of sight
Medium pulse repetition frequency
Plane of motion

Time of flight

AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the two common low altitude formations and their
parameters.

2. Identify the two methods of maneuvering a low altitude formation.

3. Identify the verbal/nonverbal communication required in crew
coordination at low altitude.

4. Given an F-15E low altitude scenario, identify proper radar
search/setup parameters.

5. Given a low altitude missile employment scenario, identify three
constraints specific to low altitude missile employment.

6. Identify the basic concerns and common errors when conducting
intercepts at low altitude.

REFERENCES
AFTTP 3-3 VOL XVII CHAPTER 3-7
AFTTP/AFTTP 3-1 VOL XVII CHAPTER 15-17

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1

TO 1F-15E-34-1-1-1

AAM-10 B-1


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook.

C-1 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-10 C-2


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

This text deals with the air-to-air employment considerations in the low
altitude environment. It is not feasible to incorporate all potential tactical
options into one lesson. While medium and high altitude ingress options
have valid applications, and the combined effects of mixed force packages
are well recognized, this text is restricted to F-15-only formations in
autonomous low level operations.

FORMATION CONSIDERATIONS
Line Abreast

The basic two-ship tactical formation at low altitude can be virtually
identical to those flown at medium altitude (Figure D-1).

el el

ELEVATION VIEW

<—_——- 4000-12,000' i
30°
PLAN VIEW AAM-10-01

Figure D - 1. Line Abreast Formation.

D-1 AAM-10


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_8.jpeg:
However, the flight members must consider the difficulty of maneuvering
due to terrain features, the decreased ability to maintain visual in rough
terrain, and the proximity of surface-to-air threats. Task loading for all
flight members is higher at low altitude due to these considerations.

The wingman's task loading can be even higher due to formation flying;
therefore, the formation contract within the element should allow the
wingman a more flexible lateral spacing of 4000-12,000 feet. The
wingman may close into 4000 feet where an easier visual can be
maintained when flight maneuvers, terrain, environment and avionics
task load become severe. When task loading is not as demanding, the
wingman can move out to 12,000 feet to decrease the possibility of a
threat gaining tally on both aircraft. These ranges are not mandatory for
all situations. Generally, maintaining visual and maneuvering the flight
are more difficult when lateral spacing exceeds 12,000 feet. Supporting
the wingman after an adversary has swung the flight’s 3/9 line is very
difficult if the flight is separated by over 12,000 feet, particularly when
only AIM-9s are available. If spacing is less than 4000 feet, the
adversaries are guaranteed tally-2, and flight path deconfliction is much
more involved while turning due to turn radius. Additionally, visual
arena defensive reactions become difficult due to reduced reaction times,
missile minimum ranges, and the wingman being inside missile
field-of-view (weapons deconfliction).

AAM-10 D-2


Text from AAM-10_Low_Altitude_Air-to-Air_Employment_page_9.jpeg:
Trail or Wedge

Tactical trail or “wedge” formation is another option for an element at low
altitude. However, it should only be used as a last resort. One viable
reason for utilizing wedge is the need to remain at very low altitude.
Another is the need to maneuver at low altitude over very rough terrain.
Wedge is normally flown in a fluid cone 30-70° aft of line abreast of the
leader, at fluid ranges of 4000-9000 feet (Figure D-2).

9000 FT

30°

70°

AAM-10-02

Figure D - 2. Trail/Wedge Formation.

D-3 AAM-10


