Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING (AAM-7) 2V X INTERCEPTS

MARCH 2000

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_10.jpeg:
Available Assets

The assets dedicated or available for your package will be spelled out in
the ATO. You must consider all of them when planning the mission.
Tanker numbers and track location will influence your marshal plan,
divert fuel, refueling priority, boom time and availability. An
often-neglected portion of mission planning is how to incorporate
GCI/AWACS into your plan; you must know their capabilities and
limitations. Know what to expect in terms of communications, frequency
usage, chattermark procedures and levels of control. You also need to be
aware of GCI radio/radar blind zones, as they may affect your CAP and/or
search. In circumstances where you can prebrief your controller, be as
specific as possible concerning your commit and engagement criteria, flow
plan and degraded operations options. No GCI is better than bad GCI—do
not contribute to bad GCI by keeping secrets. Consider the controller’s
additional wingmen and brief them accordingly. Include an
environmental brief on your check-in.

All other assets (A/A players, SEAD, other strikers, etc.) will impact your
plan. You need to ensure the plan incorporates them all and provides for
combined force employment.

Combat Air Patrol (CAP)

There are many things to consider as you enter the area. First, ensure the
fence check, trigger check and alpha checks are complete. Next, check the
environment and compare it to the weather brief. Note whether it is
difficult to see the F-15E looking up or down and where the sun is; this
could affect the flow direction of your intercept. Next, check the winds;
they will affect the GMTR setting (above ~50 knots for GMTR chaff). SYS
ALT RESET should be accomplished (prior to EGI installation) because
the radar uses system altitude to display altitudes. Consider all of these
factors (along with the airspace restrictions, AOR, etc.) to determine how
the environment will affect your intercepts. Finally, take alibis from the
formation for information on how our systems are working and if the
intercept plan has to be altered due to limiting factors (limfacs).

There are many different types of CAPs. (See AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17,

Chapter 15 for a detailed discussion of each.) Each type has different
considerations for employment.

AAM-7 D-4


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_11.jpeg:
The CAP is the starting point of the intercept. The principles of the CAP
are proper orientation and placement, use of command, control and
communications when off threat axis, ensuring adequate time and look
angle for search, and preservation of intercept room until committed. The
objectives of the CAP are building a mental three-dimensional picture of
the presentation, making a sound commit decision and committing from
the CAP in the desired formation. Notice that the CAP objectives do not
include labeling the picture. In general, the CAP phase is too early to
begin labeling the picture because it will likely change between the actual
commit and the targeting/shooting phase.

The CAP briefing includes length, location, altitude and formation in the
CAP, or the marshalling point prior to the commit. As a two-ship, you can
expect a fluid formation until the commit. Usually the hot leg (the one
with radars pointed down track) is slower than the cold leg to maximize
radar look time. It is important to CAP in the proper location to ensure
the opportunity to commit early enough to engage bandits in the desired
engagement zone (DEZ).

Another important element of the CAP is the “talker” priority order. On
the hot leg it is usually lead - GCI — wingman. On the cold leg, it is
usually GCI — lead — wingman.

Many factors affect the different CAP considerations. For CAP altitude,
factors include weather, fuel considerations, anticipated threats, terrain,
dissimilar formations and radar footprints. CAP speed factors include fuel
considerations, GCI availability and threat proximity. As a ROT, if in the
mid 20s use 350 CAS, and .9 M if in the 30s. Turns in the CAP will be
based on CAP geometry, winds at altitude and flight lead preference. The
flight lead should brief all CAP parameters and expectations.

Radar Setup

Radar setup is one of the most important aspects of the intercept. It is
extremely important to tailor your radar setup to the tactical and
environmental situation you expect. The following key terms and
concepts will give you a basis for your radar setup decisions. Actual radar
game plans are discussed in AFTTP 3-1.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_12.jpeg:
PRE

Interleaved PRF is generally the best option for threat detection at all
aspects and long-range. Consider other waveforms when specific threat
parameters (high fast fliers, EW environment, etc.) are known. MPRF
makes it easier to break out formations and helps with maneuvering
contacts, especially those at or near the beam. It also reduces the IPRF
range ambiguities, but sacrifices longer-range detection due to decreased
power output. Remember that MPRF gains down below 5000' and may
increase false returns (“birds”) at low altitude.

Scope Range

Determine the minimum range necessary to detect the threat, analyze
geometry and threat maneuvers, and still have room for the commit (i.e.,
room to establish the DEZ). Set scope range to search this minimum
range and beyond, considering the factor bandit range.

Azimuth Selection

Consider limiting azimuth selection when a single threat axis is available
(lane assignment) and/or when GCI/AWACS coverage will supplement
your own radar coverage.

Frame Store

The primary consideration is crew workload. If one crew member can
spend adequate time in radar interpretation, frame store 1 may be
adequate. If crew duties do not leave much time for radar interpretation,
consider frame store 2. Remember, however, that use of a frame store
option higher than you normally use can be more confusing than helpful.

GMTR

Four GMTR settings are available: LO, MED, HI and CHF. Each setting
sets specific velocity filters for target detection and radar blind zones in
medium PRF. The chaff setting invokes special logic for search, TWS and
manual acquisition functions (not track) in a chaff environment. Your
own altitude, winds, threat axis and probability of encountering chaff
determine the optimum GMTR setting for the mission. Lower GMTR
settings may be necessary for missions requiring detection of slow speed
targets.

AAM-7 D-6


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_13.jpeg:
Acquisition Symbol Placement

A prebriefed range must be specified to ensure that all flight members are
using the same range to set the altitude coverage. If different reference
ranges are used, gaps in the search coverage may occur. A ROT is to use
meld range (discussed later) as the acq symbol placement range.

Altitude Search Selection

Altitude sanitization and division of elevation area of responsibility (AOR)
are important factors in building a complete picture. Set up scope range
as desired (40-80 nm) with acquisition symbols at briefed meld range.
Divide the elevation coverage into high and low search to build a complete
picture. Overlap radar coverage at least 2000 feet at meld range to avoid
unintentional coverage holes. Refer to Table D-1 in the following example.
If the AOR is 20,000-40,000 feet MSL with acq symbols at 20 nm, it is
impossible to cover this AOR in either 4- or 6-bar. Selecting 4-bar
provides 12,000 feet of coverage, while 6-bar provides 16,000 feet. In
either case, the elevation scan will have to be moved. If using 4-bar, the
scan can be moved in 14" versus 21" for 6-bar (assumes 120° sweep).
However, if the AOR remains the same but the briefed acq symbol range
becomes 25 nm, the 6-bar is a more effective means of covering the AOR.
The bottom line is that by increasing the bar scan from 4 to 6, you get a
33 percent increase in altitude coverage, offset with a 50 percent increase
in search time.

BAR RANGE ALTITUDE TIME IN SEC
SCAN | __NM__| COVERAGE

4
4
4

6
6
6

NOTES:
Assumes scope range > 40 nm, RWS interleaved and one complete
bar scan.
Altitude coverage was determined using the ROT:
bar scan and 2 X range = alt coverage.

Table D - 1.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_14.jpeg:
Elevation Coverage — Bar Selection

Time to build each radar frame is determined by sweep rate, number of
bars per frame and azimuth width. Some considerations for limiting
altitude coverage are contrail level, GCI/AWACS coverage, workload,
limited altitude area of responsibility, radar footprint and radar
desensitization.

Air Force Mission Support System (AFMSS) and Mission Planning
Support System (MPSS)

The AFMSS and its more modern replacement, the MPSS, are useful tools
for planning and preparing mission data; they will be referred to
collectively as MPSS for purposes of this workbook. Flight planning, fuel
consideration data, mission routes, bull’s-eye points, airspace
restrictions/definitions and offset points can all be generated by MPSS.
Some key mission items that the crew may want displayed in the aircraft
(TSD, radar, INS), as well as communication plans, IFF phasing,
munitions loads and jettison programs can all be loaded in the DTM.

Communication Plan

The first step is to refer to the ATO and SPINs for the current frequency
list. Review the daily ATO for comm plan changes. Determine which
frequencies you are most likely to use and load those in the radio
channels. However, there should be a copy of the complete frequency plan
in the aircraft. Also consider authentication procedures; the ATO should
specify the current authenticators as well as backup and emergency
authentication procedures. Be familiar with each authenticator’s use.
Confirm KY-58 fills are loaded (through 781) and control head is set to
remote (for UFC operation). The same considerations are true for the
Have Quick radio. The time and duration of the flight may require more
than one period of authenticators, frequency plan, Have Quick
frequencies, etc. For Have Quick, consider loading two periods, one in
each radio. Also, note that multiple WODs (Have Quick IT) can be loaded
through the AFMSS for both radios. There may be situations where HQ I
is directed, others where HQ II is directed.

AAM-7 D-8


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_15.jpeg:
DTM List and Sequence Points

A common tendency is to try to display too much data; display only the
data that is essential to the mission. Sequence points and/or list points
can be used for more than defining the route; they can be used as
references for possible contingencies (alternate tanker tracks, divert fields,
etc.), outlining AORs, lanes, known troop concentrations, dump targets,
etc. Use the different mission symbols (sequence, offset, aim and target
points) to determine particular points or areas of interest. For land or
sector caps, points can be entered to define the edges or corners of your
flight’s AOR. This information (your AOR) then appears on the radar
scope and/or TSD, allowing quick assessment of whether the bandit is in
your area or not. Remember that you can display one route on the TSD
while steering to another (and displaying it on the radar). Remember,
when preparing a DTM route load to organize the data points, try not to
display too much data and restore the DTM load to the squadron standard
load (if applicable) at the end of the mission.

IFF Phasing

IFF modes and codes can be programmed for the mission and AAI can be
slaved to the phased IFF. Phasing occurs on the central computer time
(Data 1), so aircrews must ensure phasing and aircraft clock are both
based on the same time (local or Zulu). Remember that EGI defaults the
CC clock to Zulu time. Also, when AAT is slaved to IFF phasing, IFF mode
changes (either manual or phased) force AAI codes to match currently
selected Modes 1 and 3, and AAI Modes 1/2/38 default to correct code.

Aircrew and HUD Data

The aircrew has the option of programming display, scrolling and master
mode selections. HUD titling data and default radar settings for MRM
and SRM can be specified.

Ordnance
The aircrew can specify ordnance loads for combat and training PACS,

both A/A and A/G, and combat jettison options. Configuration data is
used to generate takeoff and landing data (TOLD) information.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_16.jpeg:
Crew Coordination

The F-15E, with its ordnance (AIM-120s/-7s/-9s), BVR sensors (APG-70,
A/A targeting pod, TEWS, etc.) and within-visual-range tools (large HUD,
auto acq modes), is able to effectively engage any platform in the world.
Having two crew members in the jet has proven to be an important part of
the F-15E’s success or failure. However, the complexity of the mission,
weapons and aircraft systems, and aircrew training and proficiency
frequently make crew coordination the “weak link” in the chain. In
addition to the “standard” crew coordination brief covering all the
administrative duties (EPs, ground ops, system management and other
tasks), a tactical mission demands additional important items.

For a typical air-to-air engagement, crew coordination includes:

e Radar: Who will control the radar during each phase of the
intercept? Considerations should include proficiency,
day/night, medium/low altitude. Pilots must never assume it
is not their job to control the radar. Likewise, WSOs should
not assume the radar belongs to them.

e Targeting pod: Who will operate the A/A targeting pod?
Generally, the crew member not operating the radar should
operate the targeting pod. However, there are times when
one person can and will operate both sensors at once.

e RWR: Who is primarily responsible for the RWR?
Proficiency allowing, both crew members should strive to
include the RWR in their cross-check.

e CMD: Who dispenses CMD and when? How much is
dispensed for each actuation?

As the F-15E continues to evolve (i.e., fighter data link with OFP Suite 4),
crew coordination will become even more vital (and complex) to the
success of the mission. Both pilots and WSOs should strive to be experts
on every system on the aircraft. This will make crew coordination more
efficient and your aircraft more deadly.

AAM-7 D-10


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_17.jpeg:
Visual Lookout

Visual lookout must be crew coordinated prior to the mission. AF TTP 3-8,
Volume XVII has a section devoted to responsibilities and visual search
techniques; this is a “must read.” Each crew must “cage” their clock
positions and elevation descriptions prior to any A/A engagement. This
should consist of using references on the ground and again in the air to
ensure that your “2 o’clock 10 low” is the same as the other crew
member’s. The crew brief should include some kind of system for
deconfliction of effort. One technique is for the WSO to deconflict by
watching the pilot’s head and searching a different piece of sky; another
technique is to be descriptive about where you are searching; e.g., “?M
HIGH, OUTSIDE ....”

Intercockpit Communication

Communication between cockpits should be minimized and limited to
mission essential information. AFTTP 3-1 lists communication brevity
words that apply to intercockpit communication. Normally, each
squadron has additional “standard” comm. Use these as much as possible
to limit self-induced comm jamming. Do not shortchange this important
element in the crew brief. If you have specific information you want at a
particular time, in a particular format, brief it!

Contingency Planning

There are several types of contingency planning, including overall
package/mission contingencies and flight A/A game plan contingencies.
We will address overall contingencies here and game plan contingencies
later.

Weather

Mission planning must include a bad-weather plan for all aspects of the
mission, which include marshal deconfliction, attack deconfliction,
weapons delivery, threat assessment, tanker plan, etc. Minimum weather
requirements may be spelled out in the ATO.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_18.jpeg:
Package Fallout/Late

You need to consider the minimum assets necessary to accomplish your
mission. How many A/A players are required? What is the limited tanker
plan? What is the minimum SEAD package required? How long can the
mission be slipped and what are the procedures for ensuring that all
players get the word? Again, many of these may be spelled out in the
ATO and will differ from mission to mission. Remember that many of
your assets may be coming from different bases or AORs.

Intercept Geometry/Tactics

The objective of the intercept is to position the flight to kill groups while
avoiding being killed. The goal of the intercept is to use proper geometry
to place the flight in a positional advantage while maximizing time
available to work the radar. This is accomplished by maximizing the
F-15E’s WEZ while minimizing the bandit’s WEZ.

The basic game plan is mission, threat and weapons load dependent.
These factors plus the number of threat groups will dictate if launch and
leave (LL) or launch and decide (LD) tactics should be employed. Risk
level is also important and should be spelled out by HHQ. As a ROT, use
the following guidelines:

e High risk: We are willing to accept potential losses due to a
merge.

e Medium risk: A merge is not desirable, but is acceptable.

e Low risk: Losses or a merge is not acceptable.

Launch and Leave

Taking shots and performing an out/abort maneuver outside of
decision/abort range performs the launch and leave tactic. It ensures
defeating the bandit’s WEZ and avoiding a merge. Launch and leave
tactics will usually need to be performed from medium altitude if any
shots need to be taken. Due to reduced shot ranges, launch and leave
from low altitude is almost impossible.

AAM-7 D-12


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_19.jpeg:
Launch and Decide

The basic flow should initially heat up the intercept, then WEZ manage
outside of the bandit’s maximum shot range (typically outside our meld
range). Target, take shots and crank to continue WEZ management and
F-pole. Launch and decide tactics normally assume a continuous flow
toward the target/bandits, which is also known as “worming” to the merge
(“bonsai”). However, the “skate” (launch and leave) option can also be
performed if A-pole/F-pole range allows—hence the “decide” portion of the
name. Both tactics are discussed in depth in AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17,
Chapter 15.

An offset slows the intercept down, allowing time to build the picture
when bandits are maneuvering, run the ID matrix and start the WEZ
management process. Generally, wingmen will offset outside the flight,
allowing a visual search toward the bandits that goes through lead, which
simplifies visual lookout and position keeping. The 30° scribe on the radar
works well for establishing offset while keeping contacts on all radars.

Group targeting plans and problems drive intercept options. Two
considerations that must be applied to each intercept are factor bandit
range (FBR) and shot depth (SD). FBR is the minimum range between
threat groups that allows the F-15E to achieve F-pole on the closest group
and still maintain first launch opportunity (FLO) on all groups outside of
this range. All groups within this range must be targeted. Groups
outside FBR can be subsequently engaged or avoided. In order to
maximize firepower, groups that fall outside FBR should not be included
in initial targeting. Threat weapons capability, F-15E weapons capability,
closure and proficiency drive FBR. Shot depth (SD) is how far missile
shots will be taken into groups. SD is tactic dependent and will be
different when using launch and decide (LD) or launch and leave (LL).
Rules of thumb for FBR, SD and threat WEZs can be found in AFTTP 3-1,
Volume 17, Chapter 15. Three intercept options often briefed are CATA,
the single-side offset and the bracket.

CATA

This intercept type is the fastest and allows the maximum range shot. It
consists of finding the enemy, putting him on the CATA and running hot
until shot range. The disadvantages are decreased time to picture build,
target/sort, EID and shoot. It also solves his intercept problem for him.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in
the left margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB NC
27531.

Supersedes: AAM-7, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_20.jpeg:
Single-Side Offset

The element takes offset on one side of the bandit formation (Figure D-1).
The goal is to use the superior F-15E radar capability to detect the target
and offset the formation. It is imperative that the wingman maneuver to
the deployed position immediately.

Between initial offset range and pure pursuit range, the flight assesses
the bandit(s), sorts or makes targeting assignments and employs
ordnance. The wingman’s position is critical for the sort plan, visual
lookout and radar gimbal protection.

Neg
SNE

V\S>

AAM-07-01

Figure D - 1. Single-Side Offset Intercept.

AAM-7 D-14


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_21.jpeg:
Advantages

e Visual mutual support good for both aircraft.

e Geometry is responsive to target maneuvers.

e Radar sorting is from similar radar pictures.

e Good single radar option.

e Slows intercept pacing.

Disadvantages

e Merge from single attack axis.

e Targets may get tally on both F-15Es.

e Wingman may be thrown to trail at pure pursuit range.
e

If targets check away, excessive time and fuel may be needed to

chase down the bandits.

AAM-7


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_22.jpeg:
Bracket

The bracket intercept is designed to envelop the target formation from
either side after a front-quarter merge (Figure D-2). It epitomizes the
concept of a multiaxis entry.

AAM-07-02

. Bracket Intercept.

AAM-7 D-16


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_23.jpeg:
Advantages

e Multiaxis attack entry complicates visual acquisition of both
F-15Es.

e Once the bracket starts to develop, any bandit reaction results in
turning room for at least one F-15E.

e At least one F-15E sees enough profile for a VID.

e Good visual lookout until bracket develops.

Disadvantages

e Poor visual lookout in bracket.

e Bandit maneuvers may force a switch at short range.

e Communications may be degraded in jamming environment
(beyond burn-through range).

e Wide splits are probably sortable by the targets’ radars.

AAM-7


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_24.jpeg:
Inside-Out

Another contingency is a late threat detection where your flight has been
bracketed and there is not enough intercept room to enter from the
outside. Now the flight will be forced to split and perform an inside-out
intercept (Figure D-3).

OPTION:
LEAN INTO ONE SIDE
OF THE BANDIT FORMATION
TO TAKE OTHER BANDITS
"OUT OF THE FIGHT"

AAM-07-03

Figure D - 3. Inside-Out Intercept.

AAM-7 D-18


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_25.jpeg:
Advantages

e Visual mutual support maintained until pure pursuit range.
e Responsive to bandit maneuvers.
Disadvantages

e The flight has been bracketed.
e The formation’s flight path is predictable until pure pursuit range.
e Mutual support is degraded beyond pure pursuit range.

e May expose belly to opposite bandit at merge.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_26.jpeg:
Hook-ID

Since no flight or intercept is ever perfect, contingencies must be planned
to cover the most likely breakdowns or problems. Several of these
problems can be discussed together. These are single-radar plan, forced
VID or radar/missile problems in one aircraft. To overcome these
contingencies, use a hotter single-side offset with the bad radar/wingman
deployed in a position to employ ordnance upon lead arriving at the merge
and declaring the contact hostile or timing out his shots. This profile is
commonly called the hook-ID and puts the wingman in a favorable
offensive position at the merge (Figure D-4).

HARD TURN

AAM-07-04

Figure D - 4. Hook-ID Intercept.

AAM-7 D - 20


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_27.jpeg:
Advantages

e Good kill potential — if bandit reacts to lead at merge, wingman has
good belly entry.

e Coverage of leader’s 6 o’clock is good.

e Visual identification is achieved.

e Responsive to target maneuvering.

Disadvantages

e Wingman must clear his own 6 o'clock.

e Leader will probably lose visual on wingman.

e

Aircraft merging first may not have offensive potential for some

time.

AAM-7


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_28.jpeg:
INTERCEPT BASICS

An air-to-air game plan is based on many things. The following discussion
of air-to-air game plan and mechanics is very general in nature and does
not presume any of the following:

Mission (OCA, DCA)

Flight makeup (two-ship, four-ship)

Risk level (high, medium, low)

Tactic (launch and leave, launch and decide)

Radar versus group (may include multitargeting with
AIM-120s), radar versus contact

Ordnance (AIM-120s/-7s/-9s)
Missile management (desired missile/contact ratio)

Threat (long-burn radar, short-burn radar, limited-aspect
radar, heat).

Every air-to-air game plan should take these variables into consideration
and be built around them. Remember that the air-to-air plan is never
“standard’—only bits and pieces of it are.

During the planning process, your “range ladder” should account for the
above variables. In general, your range ladder should produce a blue air
first launch opportunity (FLO) and should be built back from that
predicted range. Aircrew should memorize missile shot range rules of
thumb for different missiles at different shooter altitudes.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_29.jpeg:
As you plan, brief, execute and debrief the A/A plan, continually ask the
following three questions:

1. Formation: Lead — are you executing the briefed flow,
intercept and tactics? Wingman — are you in position or
correcting to be there?

Zz. Radar: Lead/wingman — are you in your assigned AOR or
targeting IAW the plan or lead’s directive?

3. Communication: Lead/wingman — are you using brevity,
following the comm flow plan, listening and hearing?

Communication and Picture Building

The ability to engage the enemy requires the use of clear, concise,
accurate, situational awareness-building communications. In short,
effective communications can make or break the intercept. This does not
mean talking excessively.

The two most important factors in an efficient, effective comm plan are
brevity and accuracy. Of these two, accuracy is paramount. We always
strive to communicate IAW AFTTP 3-1, but there may be times when
plain English is required to communicate accurately. Additional keys to
communication are listening and good pacing. You will not communicate
well if you do not listen and build a picture based on what you hear. Also,
there is no communication if everyone is stepping on one another. Brief a
comm flow (i.e., GCI, Eagle 1, Eagle 3) and then adhere to it. If your back
is to the fight, GCI is the primary talker, followed by lead, then number
two. If your radars are pointing down track, the fighters should talk with
GCI filling in. A good flow of communication will set the stage for a fluid,
error-free intercept.

The discussion of B/E versus BRA is normally a heated debate. In most
instances, B/E comm makes the most sense to the fighters as well as other
blue air assets (F-15Cs, AWACS, GCI, etc.). BRA format should be used
only when it makes sense (““POP-UP” “GROUP,” F-15Ks are together).
Preface all calls with “BULL’S-EYE” or “BRA” unless otherwise briefed.
Reference AFTTP 3-1 guidelines for proper communication
recommendations. This comm plan is a CAF-wide standard used by
AWACS, GCI, F-15C, etc. Attachment 1 to AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1 (Dec
99) contains brevity words and terminology.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

C
aC

coor
ojf io 0 D, 5 9 hoo 0

COVER

2 VX INTERCEPTS

INTRODUCTION

This text provides a general overview of element intercepts and factors to
be considered for aerial attack mission planning and execution. The
information contained in this workbook is essential for your
understanding of element tactical considerations and mission
employment. The text describes planning considerations, standard
terminology, intercept geometry options and system integration.

CONTENTS:

INT RODLIC TION sc anes sue ans sxc nese ans conte ante accn asus news certs axe ase eu ans mis ae mesa wate GE A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeseeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeseeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eecececcceesneeeccessseeeceessseeecceessaeeeeeesssaeeeseeessaeeeseessaeeeseeeeeaeeeeeee D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oui eeccccesseeeesneeeeesaeecssanecessaeesesaeesssneeeesaees E-1
GLOSSARY cscs sas sess sss sues see sees set sews sues sun stirs se seis Ns subs suivs Seve see ies wen sutvn ules sn F-1


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_30.jpeg:
Calling the Picture and Labels

Fundamentals

Group criteria will be [AW AFTTP 3-1, which is currently 3 nm (as an
addition, use 15,000' altitude). Group definition may be briefed
nonstandard (i.e., 5 nm, 10,000'). A group is nothing more than a hit on
your radar scope. A group may have one, two or more contacts within it.
For example, four MiG-29s flying in close formation would be a single
group. Depending on their inner-group distance, your radar beam width
and your distance from them, your radar may begin to break the
individual contacts out of the group. If two MiG-29s were flying line
abreast, 10 nm from one another, your radar scope presentation would be
two groups. As the MiGs get closer, you may be able to determine each
group contains only one MiG (single contact).

“BULL’S-EYE” or “BRA” will preface all calls to reduce or eliminate
ambiguity. Digital bull’s-eye is the format that will be used for
bull’s-eye-referenced calls (the eight cardinal directions will not normally
be used).

A full call sign will be associated with every radio transmission.

Core information will include the number of groups, bull’s-eye location,
altitude and tracking direction. One group will be called “GROUP,” not
“single group.” In addition, when using core information to anchor the
location of groups, do not say “... FIRST GROUP B/E 360/10, SECOND
GROUP B/E 040/20”. Just call them “GROUP’—no number—and anchor
the location (e.g., “... GROUP B/E 360/10, GROUP B/E 040/20”).

If an aircrew member has amplifying information on a group, they should
use the group’s location. For example, “EAGLE 1, GROUP B/E 360/10,
HITS 35,000.” By sticking to this rule, aircrew will avoid the ambiguous
type call (e.g., “EAGLE 1, HITS 2ND GROUP, 35,000”). Groups within

5 nm of the B/E will be labeled “over bull.”

For anchoring group location, the group closest to the fighters will be
anchored off bull’s-eye first, followed by the next closest, and so on. If
multiple groups are equal distance from the fighters, the group closest to
the bull’s-eye will be anchored first.

AAM-7 D - 24


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_31.jpeg:
If more than three groups are detected, aircrew will call the number of
groups, but will only anchor the closest group to the fighters. For
example, “EAGLE 1, 4 GROUPS, CLOSEST GROUP BULL’S-EYE
270/25, HITS 15,000, FLANK WEST.”

Fill-in information should include (but is not limited to) number of
contacts within a group, the inner-group formation, eyeballs and any ID
criteria met (i.e., “SPADES”).

Labeling the picture will help fighter targeting and help the flight lead
decide how to direct the actual intercept geometry and targeting. For
example, a wide azimuth presentation may warrant a single-side offset
type intercept while a pure range presentation may call for a hotter, pure
intercept. Attempt to establish a group picture prior to targeting/meld
range or bypass labeling altogether—use only core information. Common
sense and the tactical presentation should drive labeling. Some general
rules of thumb for when to label are:

e Fighters have committed, bogies/bandits are on a steady
heading (2 or more hits), formation is determinable and
labeling will help aircrew SA.

e Groups are within bounding range (one package). Groups
within a specific range (i.e., 25 nm) will be a package.
Groups outside bounding range will be labeled second
package.

Before reviewing the various picture labels, it is important to remember
not to “force the picture.” If one of the following picture labels does not
apply to your particular presentation, it is best to simply call each group
out one by one with respect to B/E than to try and make a predefined
picture label fit.

As for the labels used to describe two groups, there are two major
categories: azimuth and range. If the groups are an azimuth
relationship, name the groups using the four cardinal directions; i.e.,
northern, southern, etc. If the groups are in a range relationship, name
the groups using “LEAD GROUP” and “TRAIL GROUP.” The use of
“SIDE-SIDE” and “NEAR-FAR’” are reserved for inner-group relationships
(i.e., sorting).


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_32.jpeg:
A possible fill-in to a presentation is “ECHELON.” If the two echelon
groups are wider than they are long, call “... TWO GROUPS, AZIMUTH
SPLIT 10, ECHELON NORTHWEST, SOUTHERN B/E ....” Ifthe two
echelon groups are longer than they are wide, call “... 2 GROUPS, RANGE
SPLIT 10, KCHELON SOUTHWEST, LEAD GROUP B/E ....”

Other labels are used when we are faced with three or more groups. Some
examples of these three or more group presentations are wall, ladder,

champagne and vic (Figures D-5 and D-6).

For three or more group labels, the range or azimuth split called is the
distance between the outer edges.

80 80

q inl qk

6 MED
{e) {e)
G510 340-19 G510 340-19
"...3GROUP WALL, AZIMUTH SPLIT 25 ..." "... 3GROUP LADDER, RANGE SPLIT 12..."
AAM-07-05
Figure D - 5.

In a three-group wall or ladder, call the group in the middle the middle
group.

In a range presentation with four or more groups (four-group ladder),
name the groups after the lead group as “second, third, fourth,” etc.

AAM-7 D - 26


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_33.jpeg:
In a four-group wall, name the outside groups with cardinal directions, as
in a two-group azimuth, “northern” and “southern.” The other groups
inside the wall can be called as “southern middle” and “northern middle.”
For example, Eagle 1 calls “... LOCKED B/E 270/10, 25,000.” By using
the names mentioned above, Eagle 2 can respond, “EAGLE 1, YOU'RE
LOCKED NORTHERN GROUP, NORTHERN MIDDLE GROUP B/E
230/14.”

IAW AFTTP 3-1 definitions, champagne is an attack of three distinct
groups with two in front and one behind. The leading two groups are
attempting to bracket with the trailing third group flying up the middle.
Vic is defined as three groups/contacts with a single closest in range and
an element/two groups in trail. When calling the distances between
groups in a champagne, the azimuth split will be called first and the range
split will be called in the next transmission. When calling the distances
between groups in a vic, the range split will be called first, then the
azimuth split in the next transmission. (Currently, AFTTP 3-1,

Volume 17 directs champagne and vic labels to be called the same; e.g.,
azimuth first, then range.) However, if it looks only slightly like a
champagne or vic, it will be called a three-ship wall.

In a vic, the group closest to the fighters will be called the lead group and
the other two will be called “TRAILERS” (northern trailer and southern
trailer in a vic headed east toward the fighters).

In champagne, the two groups closest to the fighters will be called lead
groups, and the group closest to the fighters will be anchored off B/E. The
third group in a champagne will be called the “TRAILER.”


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_34.jpeg:
When labeling the presentation for a three-group champagne or vic, use
the information shown in Figure D-6.

80

1 | I |
G510 340-19 G510 340-19

"EAGLE 1, 3 GROUP CHAMPAGNE, AZIMUTH "EAGLE 1, 3 GROUP VIC, RANGE SPLIT 10,
SPLIT 12, EASTERN LEAD GROUP B/E 340/19, LEAD GROUP B/E 340/19, HITS 15,000."
HITS 15,000." FILL-IN: "TRAIL GROUP, RANGE FILL-IN: "TRAILERS AZIMUTH SPLIT 15."
SPLIT 10."

AAM-07-06
Figure D - 6.

IAW AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1, if aircrews see more than three contacts, but
the specified number cannot be accurately determined, “HEAVY” will be
used by itself. However, if aircrews can accurately count the number of
contacts in a group, they will provide the specific number of contacts.

For maneuvering groups, recognize and call the maneuver. For example,
“EAGLE 1, LEAD GROUP MANEUVER.” After the group is steady on a
heading, call the group “FLANKING/BEAMING/DRAGGING.”

In general, if a previously reported group is not processed for two
consecutive sweeps, it will be reported as “FADED” and the term
“ESTIMATE” will be used to anchor where it faded.

Labels may be changed by calling “NEW PICTURE.” However, labels will
not be changed inside a prebriefed range (typically meld range). If no
such range is prebriefed, use the briefed targeting/meld range as the
cutoff.

AAM-7 D - 28


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_35.jpeg:
If aircrews detect a previously unreported group, a “NEW PICTURE” may
need to be called. If the group is detected outside meld/target range, it
will be called a new group and anchored off B/E. Then call a new picture
if able; e.g., “EAGLE 1, NEW PICTURE, THREE-GROUP LADDER,
RANGE SPLIT 10, LEAD GROUP B/E .....” If detected inside
meld/targeting range, it will be called a pop-up group and BRA will be
used. A fighter now threatened by that group will target that group
unless already targeted to a higher threat.

Figures D-7 and D-8 depict some examples of picture building using the
discussed comm.

GSO 340-1 GSO 340-4

"EABAGLEGRO|GROUPS4RANGEITS NELGS,” “EAGLE 2BROBP SAI RANGHLSBLIT 10,

LEAD GROUP B/E 340/ 19, HITS 15,000." LEAD GROUP B/E 340/ 19, HITS 15,000."
"EAGLE 1." "EASTERN GROUP, B/E 340/19, HITS 15,000."

"EAGLE 1, TRAILER, HITS 35,000." "EAGLE 1, TRAILERS AZ SPLIT 15,

"WEISS FERN /FRAERERY STS 28.000."
AAI 7008
Figure D - 7.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_36.jpeg:
80 80
8
q< tslmli
©
6 MED
(e) Vv. fe) fe)
G510 340-19 G510 340-19
"EAGLE 2, 2 GROUPS RANGE 10 MILES, "EAGLE 2, 3 GROUPS VIC, RANGE SPLIT 10,
LEAD GROUP B/E 340/19, HITS 15,000." LEAD GROUP B/E 340/19, HITS 15,000."
"EAGLE 1, TRAILER, HITS 35,000." "EAGLE 1, TRAILERS AZ SPLIT 15,
WESTERN TRAILER, HITS 28,000."
AAM-07-08
Figure D - 8.
AAM-7 D-30


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_37.jpeg:
Intercept Flow

The overall flow of the intercept is based on several factors. These include
environmentals (“Can we come out of the sun, isolate against a cloud deck,
etc.?”), package flow (“Is the package we are defending going a particular
direction? We do not want to drag the threat to the strike package.”), our
prebriefed tactics (CATA, SSO or bracket), desired intercept geometry
(perhaps the most important factor), etc. The flow is important to build
overall SA of the flight and the rest of the package during and after
engagements, and can be broken down into several different phases.

Search

Search responsibilities are assigned in the briefing. Give some thought to
your radar coverage and base it on threat, experience level, AOR and
radar setup. Figure D-9 shows typical overlapping search blocks.
Typically, leads will search an AOR in which they expect the threat.
Initially search in 120° sweep (except in turns) until all factor groups can
be contained in a narrower sweep. At an acq symbol placement of 25 nm,
120° gives 50 nm of azimuth coverage.

AAM-07-09

Figure D - 9. Overlapping Search Blocks.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_38.jpeg:
It is important to search the extremes of your coverage first. The footprint of
the radar is smaller at the extremes and it is easier for a bandit to fly
through your coverage where the footprint is small (Figure D-10).

VERY HIGH CAP
VERY SMALL FOOTPRINT

MEDIUM CAP
LARGER FOOTPRINT

AAM-07-10

Figure D - 10. Radar Footprints.

AAM-7 D - 32


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_39.jpeg:
The two most important things to remember when searching with the radar
are discipline and patience. Discipline means sanitizing your area of
responsibility by staying in it. To properly sanitize you must use the briefed
acq symbol placement when setting your coverage. Then, move you acq
symbols to the expected azimuth and range of the bandits. Moving your acq
symbols to the predicted (or called) range of the targets will help you build a
mental picture of the presentation and will optimize HPRF at that range.
Use flight mates, AWACS, GCI, etc. to build a picture of what is happening
outside your AOR. Listen and be patient. Patience means allowing the radar
to do the work; e.g., ensuring a full sweep before resetting your coverage.
How do you know your radar has done a full sweep? You can hack a clock
(21 seconds for two full sweeps in 6-bar, INLV) or look at the bottom left of
your radar scope where it shows the bar scan of the radar. When that scan
comes up again, the radar has finished one full sweep. For example, the
radar reads 6 MED when you look at it; when it reads 6 MED again, it has
swept two full times.

Learn how to interpret the radar scope. The radar screen is twice as wide as
itis long. For example, at the 20 mile range bar, 120° sweep is 40 miles wide.
Further, the width of one 30° block on the radar equates to 2 the range (i.e.,
at 60 nm, one block is 60/2 = 30 miles wide; at 40 nm, one block is 40/2 = 20
miles wide). Finally, the acq symbols are roughly 6° wide—at 30 miles, they
are 3 miles wide (as a rule of thumb, acq range equals distance across). In
addition, altitude is given in RWS with acq symbols over a contact (accurate
+/- 5000'). All of these things can help you build a picture and make good,
SA-building calls without locking. This allows you to continue looking at the
big picture.

One last issue is TWS. Avoid using TWS within meld +5 nm to meld, unless
targeting with a radar-versus-group plan. In any case, NEVER try to search
with TWS; it has too small a search block to be effective as a search tool.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the types of intercept attack options and the advantages
and disadvantages of each.

2: Identify recommended radar search and sort parameters in the
tactical environment.

3. Identify examples of element sort priorities.
4. Identify the correct operational brevity code word for a given
situation.
REFERENCES
AFTTP 3-1 Volume 1
Volume 4
Volume 17
AFTTP 3-3 Volume XVII

AAM-7 B-1


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_40.jpeg:
Sample

Once groups are detected, the flight must build SA on them. Are they bandits
or friendlies, are they hot or cold, high or low, fast or slow, etc.? Single target
track (STT) gives the most information on a specific target but other systems
can assist in determining information about a group. EWWS, TWS, acq
symbol/altitude coffin, AAI, EID, NCTR, Highlight mode and apparent drift
can give data on various groups. This information will be used to determine
if a commit should be initiated. Fast targets require a hotter intercept profile
than slow targets. Ifthe primary game plan is an offset intercept, a hot
target (16 AA) requires more maneuvering to gain the offset than a colder
target. Note the displayed shot ranges during a sample lock. They will give
you a good indication of when to take your final lock or how to modify your
other ranges (target, meld, sort, LNLT, etc.). Also, depending on ID criteria,
STT or HDTWS may be needed for an NCTR. Remember that the longer you
are locked to a specific target, the lower your SA on what the rest of the group
is doing or what is happening with other groups.

AAT/EID/PID

In today’s BVR environment, electronic identification is critical. Getting a
“HOSTILE” call out early gets you in the mindset of killing early in the
intercept. On the other hand, a quick “FRIENDLY” call can free your brain
from trying to keep track of someone who is not trying to kill you. EID can be
accomplished without locking a target and can be used to ensure “clear field
of fire” to the bandit. If you see a friendly reply, do not lock.

With our avionics, AAI and EID use can be confusing. A sound technique is
to set up the EID to the criteria spelled out in the ROEs. Set the AAI to find
flight members. Get in the habit of going aft in the RCP and inboard in the
FCP to determine which contacts are bandits. The bottom line is do not shoot
diamonds, whether in AAI or EID.

AAM-7 D - 34


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_41.jpeg:
Some important terms for identification criteria and communication follow.

e BANDIT — a positively identified enemy aircraft. The term is a
function of identification and does not necessarily imply
direction or authority to engage.

e Hostile — a bandit upon which clearance to fire is authorized
IAW theater ROEs.

The requirements to satisfy BVR ID criteria will be sortie/scenario
dependent. The identification matrix required to ID a group “HOSTILE”
might include the need to have a positive enemy indication, a lack of friendly
indication or both. In addition, a visual identification (VID) may fulfill the
requirements to employ ordnance. The ability to meet BVR ID criteria can
come from onboard systems, offboard systems or a combination of both.

NOTE: Most current theaters require both a positive enemy indication and a
lack of friendly indication to ensure the aircraft within a group is/are enemy
owned and operated.

Positive Enemy Indications
The following may or may not be used to satisfy a positive enemy indication.

e Point of origin (POO) — a group operating beyond a political
boundary, FEBA, FLOT or another specified enemy safe area
may be called a bandit. AWACS will also use the term
“OUTLAW” in this situation.

e NCTR —- an unambiguous return will be indicated with “PRINT
.” The fill-in may be called in the clear or called with
a code word.

e Mode X — a Mode X return will be indicated by the word “ECHO”
IAW AFTTP 3-1.

e AWACS/GCI may “DECLARE” a group hostile using
information such as POO, IFF, situational awareness, etc.
Declarations are normally used for aircraft lacking onboard
interrogation equipment (F-16).


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_42.jpeg:
Lack of Friendly Indication

In order to satisfy lack of friendly requirements, a completed check of
identification friend or foe (IFF)/selective identification feature (SIF) codes
must be accomplished. If using STT/PDT, processing must be completed, not
just initiated.

e “PAINTS” will be used (IAW AFTTP 3-1 “friendly IFF
interrogation return”) to mean a group does NOT meet “lack of
friendly” criteria; i.e., the group IS squawking one or more of the
required friendly modes/codes.

@ “SPADES” will be used IAW AFTTP 3-1 “lack of required
friendly IFF reply”) to mean a group DOES meet the “lack of
friendly” criteria; i.e., the group in question is NOT squawking
required modes 1, 2, 3C or 4, depending on SPINs.

Commit

Commit criteria is ROE dependent. The briefing usually includes commit
criteria (e.g., within 40 nm of CAP point or in the area of responsibility with
aspect 9 H-12 C). You can expect different commit criteria on each sortie.
Sometimes aspect, airspeed and range define the commit; other times the
location of the radar contacts defines it. Generally, fighters commit in order
to engage targets in a desired engagement zone (DEZ). The DEZ may be
defined by the particular AOR or by the flight lead. The bottom line in the
air is that the wingman can recommend, but lead has the hammer on the
commit. The briefed criteria are a guide, rather than a contract, for the flight
to commit.

Aborted Commit

If the fighters have committed, there are certain times to abort the commit
and return to the CAP. Reasons may include bandits dragging at long range
or outside the DEZ, bandits greatly outnumber the fighters, no PID, EA, etc.
Aborted commit should be included in the plan and understood by all players.

The mechanics for a commit should include a climb to maximize your WEZ
and ensure first launch opportunity (FLO) and acceleration to above the
mach (if able). Jettison the fuel tanks if ROE/squadron standards
dictate/allow, but remember that once you jettison them, they are gone for
good. Take fuel considerations into the jettison decision.

AAM-7 D - 36


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_43.jpeg:
Sanitize

Realize that the sample phase may occur several times during the search
phase. However, you need to ensure that all threats in your AOR have been
identified. This is the sanitization phase. A good rule of thumb is to make
sure you resanitize your AOR 5 nm prior to the meld. Remember to search
the extremes first.

Target

The targeting phase starts at the commit when the picture is being built. In
general, target groups and sort within groups. Fighter numbers and
ordnance, bandit numbers and ordnance, and the planned fighter tactic will
determine how the targeting will be accomplished. The targeting plan may
be for the fighters to target radar versus group (assigning a radar to each
factor group and multitargeting using TWS and AIM-120s) or radar versus
contact (assigning more than one radar to each group, sort within that group
and shoot each contact with AIM-7s/-120s). If the targeting plan is
well-briefed (and well-understood) the actual targeting should be obvious and
should not require directive comm from lead.

It is important to understand the concept of owning and sharing groups for
targeting to be effective. If you are targeting in accordance with the briefed
plan or have been directively targeted to a group, you own that group. This
means that you are the primary targeter and it is your responsibility to
kill/maintain SA on all contacts in that group. If your group subsequently
maneuvers and meets your return to search (RTS) criteria, you are still
responsible for the group until you ensure a positive handoff to another flight
member, AWACS or GCI. In general, flight leads and element leads will own
groups as the primary targeters. If a meld has been called on a group, then
other flight members designated to meld are sharing that group (secondary
targeters). When sharing, the secondary targeter will pick up the secondary
sort responsibility (i.e., as the wingman [far, respective side, AOR altitude]).

As an example of this concept, assume the fighters step with a primary plan
of radar versus group, multitargeting using TWS and AIM-120s. The initial
picture shows a single group with four contacts, but the fighters are only
loaded with three AIM-120s each. A single fighter cannot multitarget into
the group and account for all contacts. Lead may call, “EAGLE 2, MELD
BULL 360-50-21,000, FOUR CONTACTS, AZIMUTH.” With a single call
(meld), lead has just directed a change from radar versus group (each fighter
owning a group) to radar versus contact (both fighters sharing a group). Note
here, the fighters must still multitarget into the heavy group in order to
account for all contacts.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_44.jpeg:
This brings up the roles of primary and secondary targeters. The primary
targeter is the fighter responsible for targeting a specific group. Specific
responsibilities are:

e Locking the group at the briefed range

e ID if required

e Multitargeting or calling the meld if sharing is required

e Communicating sort responsibilities if required

e Eyeball count

e Maintaining STT/PDT on respective side or highest threat

e Communicating bandit maneuvers

The secondary targeter is responsible for assisting the primary targeter.
Specific responsibilities include:

e Sanitizing and melding around primary targeter’s group (if
required)

@ Targeting spitters
@ Targeting pop-ups
e Sharing the group (if called in)

e Targeting the group when directed (shots trashed, heavy group,
etc.)

Realize that all these are prebriefed responsibilities. Lead always has the
hammer for directive targeting.

AAM-7 D - 38


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_45.jpeg:
Meld

Meld range depends on desired weapons employment range. AFTTP 3-1,
Volume 17, Chapter 15 discusses considerations for weapon employment
ranges. Minimal sort range should be 2-3 nm outside shot range, although
this may be increased due to ID requirements. In order to ensure all flight
members will see the threat picture, meld range must be an additional
5-10 nm outside sort range. Therefore, if you want to shoot NLT 20 nm, a
25 nm sort range and a 30 nm meld range might be appropriate.

The purpose of the meld is to see the picture—to find sort responsibility or
initiate targeting. When melding radars it is important to put your radar in
a position to (in decreasing priority) find your sort, see the entire picture and
bias altitude to your area of responsibility. Whether you own a group alone
(targeting) or are sharing a group (sorting), the mechanics of melding are the
same. The four basic mechanics are 60° sweep, MPRF, acq symbols leading
the group and set altitude coverage. At the meld call, acq symbols should be
initially placed at the briefed lock/sort range, then the altitude coverage set to
find your responsibility.

Initially, center your altitude coverage on the called altitude or on the last
known altitude of the group. As your proficiency increases, a good rule of
thumb is to bias your altitude coverage 5000' below/above the target, towards
your wingman’s AOR. For example, if you have the high search and the
target is at 18,000' put the bottom of your radar coverage to 13,000'. The
range to meld radars is weapons load, altitude and threat dependent.
Generally, meld in time to complete EID and sort for FLO/desired launch
range.

If planning to sort (share), the most important information is the group
altitude —“EAGLE 2, MELD, 25,000.”

Assume the group is within 30° of the nose and at the prebriefed meld range.
If this is not the case, then this information should be added to the meld call:
“EAGLE 2, MELD, 25,000, BRA 360-25.”

Additionally, the inner group picture should be called ASAP after the meld
call. If no picture is called, expect the wingmen to sort IAW the brief
according to the radar-apparent picture—“EAGLE 2, MELD 25,000,
SIDE-SIDE.”


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_46.jpeg:
The actions and comm, if clean after the meld, should also be briefed. In
general, if you are unable to see the picture on your scope after two full
sweeps, call “CLEAN.” The fighter with the picture should select TWS and
multitarget if able. If unable, the fighter with the picture should tell the
clean fighter where to look to find the sort. If both fighters are clean at the
meld, the flight lead should call a “de-meld.” This is a directive call to return
to search in your respective AOR. A common technique is to bring your acq
symbols 3-5 nm in front of the last known contact to set your coverage. This
will ensure adequate overlap in coverage at the closest possible range to the
lost contact.

Lock No Later Than (LNLT)/Sort

Lock range is established to ensure first launch opportunity (FLO) against an
adversary. If a valid sort can be accomplished, all players should lock/sort at
this predetermined range. If a valid sort cannot be accomplished, the
primary targeter (normally the flight lead/element lead) should lock to ensure
FLO. If owning the group alone, TWS should be selected after the initial shot
if more than one contact is known or expected.

The objective of sorting is to ensure all targets within a group are engaged to
achieve maximum kills premerge. A meld call should always precede a sort.
If no meld call is made, it is assumed the primary targeter is multitargeting
and the wingman will stay in search to sanitize for pop-ups/spitters. Radar
apparent geometry drives the sort, not necessarily the formation bandits are
flying. Possible radar-apparent formations are:

Side-Side (azimuth) — One side of acq symbols fits between returns
Near-Far* (range) — Distinct range breakout (generally = 2 nm)

High-Low (altitude) — May appear as one return but at two separate
altitudes

“Recall near-far is used for inner-group formation (sorting), while lead-trail is
used when labeling groups in range (picture building, targeting).

AAM-7 D - 40


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_47.jpeg:
The primary sort plan should be to match your formation. When sorting in
range, leads take the closest bandit, wingmen the farthest. When sorting in
azimuth, take the bandit that matches your position in the formation (your
side). If planned to be in a trail formation ( NAV FLIR trail), it should be
briefed how to handle a side-side sort. For example, inside-out is a method of
dealing with this. The lead sorts from the nose out, and the wingman sorts
from the side of the scope in. Multitargeting (more targets than missiles)
should be addressed as a contingency in the brief. It may be more useful to
brief a cardinal direction (i.e., lead sorts northern, and wingman sorts
southern).

If a valid sort is accomplished, call your sort with the appropriate label—
“EAGLE 2 SORTED FAR.” If unsure that a valid sort is achieved, call
“LOCKED” with the B/E and altitude. When locking and unsure of a valid
sort, the rule of 2s (altitude 2000', range 2 nm or heading 20°) is a good rule
of thumb to determine if you actually have a good sort. In that case, the call
sounds like: “EAGLE 2, LOCKED, B/E 230, 20, 20,000.”

The response should be one of two possible responses:

“EAGLE 1, SORTED NEAR, B/E 235, 25, 15,000” — lead just told you
that the flight is sorted and Eagle 2 is sorted far.

or

“EAGLE 1, LOCKED SAME, HEADING 180” — Eagle 1 has used the
rule of 2s, and the altitude and range of his contact were within two of
yours.

Now you must look at the heading of your bandit to see if there is greater
than 20° difference. If good (greater than 20°), call “EAGLE 2, HEADING
210, GOOD SORT.” If bad (within 20°), call “EAGLE 2 BAD SORT, BAD
SORT.”

Normally, the first to realize the bad sort will break lock and attempt to
achieve a valid sort. One caveat is if missiles are already in the air. In this
case, call “BAD SORT, FOX 3 THERE,” and flight lead will make the call on
who will break lock and sanitize to find the sort.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_48.jpeg:
Remember that sorted does not mean locked. Nevertheless, once you are
sorted, you have a contract to monitor your responsibility and kill when in
position to do so. Sort on the shortest-range scope you can. This gives the
largest apparent breakout on the radar. When locking into a near-far
formation, bring the acq symbols in from the front of the formation to lock the
lead group, and from the back to lock the trailer. If locking into an azimuth
sort, come in from outside your man. This helps you lock the correct contact.
Also, try to lead your lock to allow the contact to “fly” into your mini-raster
because the radar shows history. Another technique is called spearing. This
is using the tip of the inside acq symbol to spear your sort contract

(Figure D-11). Generally, lock range is dependent on bandit altitude (WEZ).
A good rule of thumb for NLT lock range is 20 nm.

F
L
[e)
le)
D
R
Cc
D

AAM-07-11

Figure D - 11. Moving in and Spearing.

AAM-7 D - 42


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_49.jpeg:
Shot

This is also mission, risk level, weapons load, altitude and threat dependent.
Weapons employment should be planned and briefed. Brief primary shooters,
noting the element leads are not required to be the primary shooters. In fact,
the scenario may drive wingmen as the primary shooters, while the element
leads hold missiles and keep their radars in RWS, waiting for the dust to
settle from the initial shots. This is a frequent F-15C employment tactic.

Regardless of your mission or loadout, missile management is always critical.
Your plan may call for a “shoot-look-shoot” (shoot, assess shot, shoot again if
necessary) or “shoot-shoot-look” (shoot two, assess shots) option. Typically,
attempt to shoot at DMC = 30-50. You can increase the DMC by centering
the dot; if on a CATA intercept, this will consist of a loft. A typical increase
with a loft is 10-30 DMC. The effectiveness is dependent on the altitudes of
both the shooter and the target. The goal is a single-shot kill. Monitor initial
shots and take follow-up shots out of a crank if necessary. After the initial
shot, crank at least 50-60° cold on the scope (on the fence works well). A
crank is a hard turn (4-5 Gs) as quickly as possible after the shot. You should
also descend and slow down (but maintain a tactical airspeed). You need to
watch bandit maneuvers while maintaining the crank so as not to gimbal.
Remember the difference between the HUD’s aspect stick and the radar
B-scope’s relative heading stick; do not confuse the two. During an
aggressive crank, a quick glance at the radar’s heading stick may make the
target appear to be maneuvering. Check the target’s displayed heading or
assess aspect changes via the HUD’s aspect stick. If the situation allows,
crank in the direction that supports your lead/wingman. The objective of the
crank is to decrease the bandit’s WEZ and maximize your F-pole. Remember
that you do not get the expanded F-pole if you are shooting out of TWS, so
plan to keep the TWS volume on the radar, and use no more than 4 Gs prior
to MPRF active.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in the workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1, Attachment 1, the Operational Brevity
Words, Terminology, and Air-to-Air Communications Standards.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_50.jpeg:
Crank Priorities

The following will give you a basic guideline to help you make the best
decision. Realize that it is you on the line and any decision is better than no
decision. Crank priorities are

1. Away from spikes. If you are spiked, you have to assume that
you are in or close to a WEZ. Crank in the closest direction to
put the spike on the beam.

2. Away from known factor threats. If other threats are or may be

a factor, crank away to isolate all the threats to one side.

3. With the briefed flow/mutual support. Large packages may
have a briefed flow; therefore, it would be in your best interest to
follow it and not be shot by a trigger-happy viper. Otherwise,
crank with your flight lead to maintain mutual support.

4. Against your bandit and away from his nose.

5. Toward green airspace. GCI or SA will be able to determine
this.

It is in your best interest to know the picture/threats when you take your
APG-70 from RWS to STT. Do not forget to communicate your actions so those

around you know what you are doing.

Decision Range

Decision range is the range at which you must decide to press the attack or go
out. The winning, losing, neutral decision is also made at this range. See
AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17, Chapter 15 for definitions and explanations.

Abort Range

Abort range is the last-chance range to go out and avoid a merge. See
AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17, Chapter 15 for definitions and explanations.

Shot Depth

Shot depth is how far into a threat display missiles will be shot. See
AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17, Chapter 15 for definitions and explanations.

AAM-7 D - 44


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_51.jpeg:
Split

This is guidance provided to the wingman. When the position/maneuvers of
the target pull the wingmen away from their formation position, they must
decide whether to leave formation or pass the target to GCI and maintain
formation. Split criteria are generally briefed as a target aspect at a given
range. This also applies to pop-up groups inside of meld range. A good rule
of thumb is to split if bogey/bandit aspect is greater than the range inside
FBR. It should be briefed whether split criteria is auto or must be requested.
Regardless, comm should be exchanged to increase all flight members’ SA.
The basic floating/split comm includes:

e Floating: Target has reached 45° and you must turn to
maintain radar SA.

e Split: At visual limits. Request to leave formation to prosecute
the attack.

e Crossing: Crossing lead’s 6 o’clock to maintain radar SA/STT.

Drop/Monitor

Maneuvering bandits can create confusion and a breakdown in your flight’s
formation integrity. You want to avoid having the target maneuvers scatter
your flight, lose all mutual support and have little or no SA about the overall
merge environment. Additionally, and probably more important, you do not
want to stay in STT on a bandit that is outside of a WEZ for an extended
amount of time and allow an untargeted bandit to arrive within a WEZ and
shoot. Generally, monitor or return to search (RTS) when outside of a WEZ
and:

e target beam aspect, outside of 15 nm

e target drag aspect, outside of 10 nm
Meeting RTS criteria does not mean “DROP.” You must always maintain SA
on your targeting/sort responsibility. Try to get a tally-ho or the targeting
pod on the group before returning to search. Also, select MPRF and 60°

sweep to maintain the highest chance of maintaining hits on the radar.

The “DROP” means that you have handed the responsibility for that group or
threat to another agency/flight (GCI, F-15C or other A/A assets).


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_52.jpeg:
ALL-ASPECT MISSILE DEFENSE (AAMD)

The key to properly defending is to always know your spike status, shot
status and range. It is also very important to know whether you were spiked
before or after your shot, especially when shooting AIM-7s. When offensively
engaging a threat BVR, you will use a decision and abort range based on the
threat. AFTTP 3-1 contains a good discussion of recommended decision/abort
ranges. These ranges will ensure you can defeat any front-quarter shots
kinematically and be outside of a rear-quarter WEZ after the maneuver. If
outside abort range, you have a choice to abort or notch. If inside abort
range, you are forced to notch. To decide if an abort is necessary you need to
decide if you are winning or losing. In short, if you are naked and supporting
a missile, you are winning. If you are spiked within the threat’s shot range
and have not shot, you are losing. If in a losing situation outside abort range
or if you do not feel you have good SA inside meld, prior to abort range, then
abort. To perform an abort, slice the aircraft 135° in AB to put the
bandit/bogey on your tail in minimum time while max performing the aircraft
(sliceback). If you find yourself in a losing situation inside abort range, make
a hard descending turn to the notch, dispense chaff, start looking for a tally
and thinking about IRMD. Asa rule, attempt to abort as a flight or element,
but notch as a singleton. Remember that the flight lead is the ultimate
authority. Ifthe flight lead calls an abort, it is directive; the wingman’s call
is descriptive.

Visual Arena

For most game plans, the goal is to shoot beyond visual range (BVR) and
remain BVR. However, some conditions/scenarios may require a merge. The
first thing to do is effectively pass the radar/visual responsibilities between
cockpits. Denying the bandit tally and acquiring tally is a huge advantage.
Also, going blind or stripped is a possibility in this phase. Do not keep
secrets—if you are “BLIND” call it. Call “STRIPPED” if outside briefed
formation and unable to tactically return.

AAM-7 D - 46


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_53.jpeg:
INFRARED MISSILE DEFENSE (IRMD)

Prior to the merge, IRMD becomes a player. Try to get as much speed as
possible prior to the 10 nm point. IRMD effectiveness depends on the threat
missile. In general, against less than fourth-generation heaters, the
following technique is good. At 10 nm start cooling down by getting out of AB
if the bandit is hot (> 16 AA). At 8 nm stand up your throttles, if able.
Around 5 nm, get the power back to idle and flare if you are spiked. If
performing AAMD, use 8 nm for out of AB, 5 nm stand up the throttles, and
3 nm power to idle and flares with a break into the bandit to deny IR missile
shots. Use timing to estimate 8, 5 and 3 nm, and a tally to determine when
to break into the bandit. Crew coordinate who will employ countermeasures.
This way both crew members will not put them out at the same time and
waste them.

Merge

At the merge, the possibility for ACM engaged/supporting roles exists. Use
proper comm (334 FS/DOW ACM comm handout) so there is a definite role
for each fighter. If multiple bandits are alive, clearing your flight path and
maintaining tally visual of all players is imperative. It is important to keep
the visual to avoid collisions into one another. A second consideration is the
flow to additional groups. Most likely the supporting fighter is monitoring
additional groups and will direct the flow to additional groups at the end of
the engagement.

Egress/Separation

Getting a quick separation is your number one priority when egressing a
fight. Air-to-air engagements and fireballs tend to draw a crowd and you
probably do not want to be there when more players arrive. The direction of
the separation is secondary. Ideally, you would like to separate toward a
friendly area, but that may not be feasible. So, head “the same way, same
day” and regroup. Always remember to change your altitude block when
able. Then turn back to the friendly area as a flight. Just in case the flight
separates, there needs to be a rendezvous plan. Also, consider your fuel and
ordnance state when egressing a fight. Have a short-range radar game plan.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_54.jpeg:
SHORT-RANGE RADAR

Anytime you are clearing a merge or turning the flight to a direction that has
not been sanitized, employ short-range radar mechanics to clear your flight
path. Imagine building a bubble around your formation as you roll out on the
new heading. Always work from near to far. In general, use AUTO GUNS to
your side of the formation, biased into your AOR. Each sweep in AUTO
GUNS takes about 6 seconds. After one sweep in your AOR, bias the
coverage into the other AOR for one sweep. Always remember to look
visually into the AOR opposite of the AUTO GUNS search. After a frame in
each AOR (approximately 12 seconds), return to 20 nm scope, MPRF and
120° sweep. Place acquisition symbols at half scope (10 nm) and set the
prebriefed altitude coverage for a minimum of one full frame before returning
to long-range search. Remember that on a 20 nm scope you actually have
coverage out to 30 nm with the range limited cue capability of the APG-70.

Short-Range Commits

The actions in a short-range commit depend on range. Contacts outside meld
range will be handled IAW the briefed long-range plan. Remember that
groups outside meld will be prefaced with core information using DBE
information.

Inside of meld range, things need to happen fast because we do not have time
to build a picture and target. Inside of meld, call “POP-UP” with BRA.
Normally the flight lead will either target you there, or tell you to sanitize
because he is employing ordnance there. If you see more than one contact,
call a meld and sort appropriately (Figure D-12).

Inside FBR, the bandit is possibly in a WEZ and there is no time to meld and
sort. In this case, revert to ACM comm and roles. Call “ENGAGED” with
BRA (if acquired on the radar) or a clock position (if acquired visually). ID
and shoot ASAP! The flight lead will call you off using engaged comm if
necessary. Remember to check your spike status and react accordingly
(Figure D-12).

AAM-7 D - 48


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_55.jpeg:
40

"GROUP, BULL..."

"POP-UP, BRA..."
"ENGAGED, BRA..."

AAM-07-12

Figure D - 12.

Defensive Response

Similar to AAMD, the key is to be continuously aware of your spike status. If
against a correlated threat on the radar, the reaction will be basically the
same as the previous AAMD discussion. However, in a tactical environment,
you may be spiked from an unknown bandit. It is paramount to have a plan
to be able to survive. In general, uncorrelated far spikes (a spike from a
direction other than the bandits you see on your radar) can be reacted to

offensively. Turn to put a radar in the direction of the spike and use

short-range radar to find, ID and kill. Uncorrelated medium and near spikes
must be treated differently because the bandit may be in a WEZ. In general,
the spiked fighter will turn in the shortest direction to the notch and the
naked fighter will turn to the bearing of the spike, so use short-range radar

and visual lookout to find and kill.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_56.jpeg:
CONTINGENCIES

The following is a list of different contingencies that may need to be

considered:

AAM-7

If there is a single contact or unsortable group, who locks and
shoots? That depends on what lead briefs, which is personal
preference, and depends on the experience level of each flight
member.

SKOSH/WINCHESTER: Automatic RTB or continue for radar
SA, ete.

Fighter fallout: Who will pick up primary talker, targeter and
shooter roles? How will the formation change?

GADGET BENT: Give the “tactical” lead to the good radar and
fly an offset intercept to the visual arena.

AAI/EID BENT: The good AAI has the hammer on bandit calls.

RWR/CMD/ICS BENT: For CMD, RWR and ICS problems,
leave it up to each crew to make a personal decision. One
technique is to have one good RWR in the element and assume
the same spike status.

Electronic attack (EA): In general, counter deception techniques
(“MUSIC”) with MPRF and counter noise techniques
(“STROBES”) with HPRF. In addition, switching radar
channels and offsetting the formation out of the jamming
pattern may be effective.

Return to search: Lastly, when does the flight return to search
and monitor a maneuvering bandit? That is threat dependent,
but typically use 10 nm for a dragger and 15 nm for a contact in
the beam.

High fast flyer (HFF): Define the HFF in the brief.
Engagement will likely include aggressive intercept geometry
and a climb to obtain near co-altitude and a hot (> 16 AA)
aspect. Missile choice is also a factor (AIM-7 versus AIM-120).


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_57.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

PRF optimizes detection of all-aspect targets at all

ranges.

a. Interleaved

b. Medium

c. High

d. Velocity search

When initiating radar search from the CAP and GCI/AWACS is not
available, search

a. radar elevation extremes first.

b. radar elevation extremes last.

c. low block first.

d. wherever you want.

Disadvantages of the intercept geometry are:

wingman must clear his own 6 o’clock, leader may lose the visual in
the endgame and the aircraft merging first may not have offensive
potential for some time.

a. bracket

b. single-side offset
c. hook-ID

d. inside-out

The operational brevity code word to describe a target with
stabilized aspect between 70° and 110° is

a. FLANK/FLANKING.
b. BEAM/BEAMING.

c. NOTCH/NOTCHING.
d. DRAG/DRAGGING.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_58.jpeg:
5. The operational brevity code word to describe a target altitude of

6000 feet is
a. LOW.
b. MEDIUM.
c. HIGH.
6. Contacts resolved in range will normally be sorted in the
priority.
a. side-side
b. near-far
c. low-high

AAM-7 E-2


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_59.jpeg:
AAMD
A/A

A/G

AB
ACM
ACO
ACP
acq
AFMSS
AGL
AIM
AOR
ASAP
ATO
AWACS
B/E
BRA(A)
BVR
CAF

CAP

GLOSSARY
Aspect angle
All-aspect missile defense
Air-to-air
Air-to-ground
Air-to-air interrogator
Afterburner
Air combat maneuvering
Airspace control order
Airspace control plan
Acquisition
Air Force mission support system
Above ground level
Air intercept missile
Area of responsibility
As soon as possible
Air tasking order
Airborne warning and control system
Bull’s-eye
Bearing, range, and altitude (aspect)
Beyond visual range
Combat Air Forces

Combat air patrol


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-7

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_60.jpeg:
CAS

CATA

CC

CMD

DBE

DCA

DEZ

DTM

EA

ECM

EGI

EID

EP

EW

EWWS

FBR

FCP

FEBA

FEZ

FLIR

FLO

FLOT

AAM-7

Calibrated airspeed

Collision antenna train angle
Central computer
Countermeasures dispenser
Digital bull’s-eye

Defensive counter air
Desired employment zone
Data transfer module
Electronic attack

Electronic countermeasures

Embedded global positioning system inertial navigation
system

Electronic identification
Emergency procedure
Electronic warfare

Electronic warfare warning set
Factor bandit range

Front cockpit

Forward edge of battle area
Fighter engagement zone
Forward looking infrared

First launch opportunity

Forward line of own troops

F-2


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_61.jpeg:
GCI
GMTR
HDTWS
HFF
HHQ
HPRF
HQ
HUD
IAW
ICS

ID

IFF
INLV
INS
IPRF
IR
IRMD
LD

LL

LNLT

MEZ

MPRF

Ground controlled intercept
Ground moving target reject
High data rate track while scan
High fast flyer

Higher headquarters

High pulse repetition frequency
Have Quick

Head-up display

In accordance with

Internal countermeasures set
Identification

Identification friend or foe
Interleaved

Inertial navigation system
Interleaved pulse repetition frequency
Infrared

Infrared missile defense
Launch and decide

Launch and leave

Lock no later than

Mach

Missile engagement zone

Medium pulse repetition frequency

F-3 AAM-7


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_62.jpeg:
MPSS

MRR

MSL

NAV

NCTR

NLT

hm

OCA

OFP

PACS

PDT

PID

POO

PRF

RCP

ROE

ROT

RTB

RTS

RWR

RWS

SA

SAR
AAM-7

Mission planning support system
Minimum risk routing

Mean sea level

Navigation

Noncooperative target recognition

No later than

Nautical mile

Offensive counter air
Operational flight program
Programmable Armament Control System
Primary designated target
Positive identification
Point of origin

Pulse repetition frequency
Rear cockpit

Rules of engagement

Rule of thumb

Return to base

Return to search

Radar warning receiver
Range while search
Situational awareness

Search and rescue


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_63.jpeg:
SD

SEAD

SIF

SPINS

SRM

SSO

STT

TD

TDA

TEWS

TOLD

TOT

TSD

UFC

VID

WEZ

WOD

WSO

Shot depth

Suppression of enemy air defenses
Selective identification feature
Special instructions

Short range missile

Single-side offset

Single target track

Target designator

Target density altitude

Tactical electronic warfare system
Takeoff and landing data

Time on target

Tactical situation display

Track while scan

Upfront control

Visual identification

Weapon employment zone

Word of the day

Weapon systems officer


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_64.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
MISSION PLANNING

One of the most important aspects contributing to mission success is
premission planning. When planning for a mission, remember that there
is no single, best solution to any given tactical situation. The prudent
flight leader considers all available tactical options to develop a game plan
that accomplishes the mission objectives and is executable by the
least-experienced member of the flight.

Mission Planning Sources

Air Tasking Order (ATO)

The first source available for mission planning is the ATO. It is commonly
referred to as the frag and is written by the theater air component
commander. It directs the mission and the required assets. The mission
objectives drive all the subsequent planning and are balanced with force
survival to arrive at the combat plan. The frag also contains information
the individual flight leads will need to execute the mission. It will list the
call signs, ordnance, targets, TOTs, mission commander, package
elements, tanker information and any other support assets. Special
instructions (SPINs) and notes usually accompany it. Each mission will
be directed to the notes that will give additional information about the
mission or package. The SPINs and notes provide the coordination
instructions for composite force operations and include general
information that could explain the objectives or emphasize areas of
command concern. The SPINs are usually broken down into monthly,
weekly and daily SPINs. The monthly SPINs contain general information
or things that do not change; e.g., the overall engagement criteria, the
EID/PID criteria, the active tanker tracks, etc. The weekly SPINs contain
information that changes more rapidly; e.g., radio frequencies, code words,
changes to the monthly SPINs, etc. The daily SPINs have only those
things that change on a daily basis; e.g., IFF modes and codes, transition
levels or SAR codes. All of these documents should be checked to make
sure they all agree and do not hamper the mission. Changes to the ATO
or SPINs must be coordinated through the ATO production agency.


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_8.jpeg:
Airspace Control Order (ACO)/Airspace Control Plan (ACP)

The ACO is used to implement airspace control procedures. The aircrew
must be intimately familiar with this document to prevent degradation of
friendly air defense tactics or even worse, being shot down by friendly
forces. Key information listed in the ACO includes minimum risk routing
(MRR), missile engagement zones (MEZs), fighter engagement zones
(FEZs), kill zones, kill boxes, preset CAP points, AWACS orbits and
tanker tracks.

Intelligence

The intelligence section provides “big picture” data concerning the
air/ground/electronic order of battle. Intelligence also provides some
detailed information concerning enemy defenses, probable points of
encountering defenses, number of and type of systems, avionics capability
and tactics (observed and estimated). One approach to using intelligence
is to build a big picture, then develop the plan. Fine tune the plan with
detailed analysis of available intelligence data.

Weather

The weather shop estimates weather conditions for the area of operations.
Use this data to determine how weather may limit or enhance some of
your options. Consider tops and bottoms of cloud layers, visibility, contrail
level, solar azimuth and elevation, moon illumination, weather
restrictions at divert fields and how the weather may affect the support
assets. Weather condition estimates are likely to be less accurate the
further you operate from friendly territory.

AAM-7 D-2


Text from AAM-7_2_v_X_Intercepts_page_9.jpeg:
Mission Planning Considerations

With the “big picture” data, you are ready to plan the specifics for your
mission. The following list is not all-inclusive, but contains some
considerations for mission planning.

Weather

Cloud layers may force you higher or lower than the desired altitude.
Consider how much clear air above and below the cloud layers will be
optimum for visual lookout and threat reactions; the minimum altitude
may be spelled out for you in the ROKs. Contrails highlight you visually
but can be used to limit your radar search. In-flight visibility may force
the flight into tighter visual formations (reducing 6 o’clock coverage) or
may force a detached mutual support formation (radar trail), limiting the
wingman’s radar lookout. Sun angle may determine an offset direction
and final attack geometry. TDA/IR visibility may also influence the
attack profile or direction. If at night, moon illumination and elevation
need to be considered. Winds, at altitude and for the weapon time of fall,
must be considered when planning the mission; severe crosswinds or
head/tailwinds may be a determining factor for target attacks and fuel
planning. Finally, weather is a factor in determining fuel requirements
for diverts, or which diverts are even available.

Terrain

Selection of ingress and egress altitudes involves a number of trade-offs.
Consider the mission objective, threat capability, crew workload and radar
detection as the primary issues when determining penetration altitudes.
Terrain masking may offer good concealment but may limit your own
radar detection and weapons capabilities. Low altitude may severely
affect friendly GCI capability. MSL versus AGL must be considered for
threat assessment, ejection altitudes, RWR considerations and weapons
effects. Do not forget to determine radar blind zones and possible ambush
CAP locations for your own formation’s radar game plan.


