Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-3
A/A MISSION TASKS

MARCH 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_10.jpeg:
Crew Coordination

The final, and probably the most important part of aircrew preparation
indigenous to the F-15E community is crew coordination. Having two
crew members in the jet to perform duties in the air-to-air environment
can be a decisive advantage or a hindrance, depending on how they
execute as a team. It is vitally important that the flight lead leave ample
time after the mission brief for crews to coordinate before they step to the
jets. Every crew brief should cover how the crew will handle the
“motherhood” items—the standard operating procedures of your particular
wing/squadron. But the emphasis of the brief should center around the
division of duties within your jet throughout all phases of the air-to-air
engagement. The brief must include how the radar will be employed.

Who will initially control the radar and when will control pass to the other
cockpit? Who is responsible for maintaining the “visual,” formation
position, and assigned altitude blocks? You also need to address how you
will employ the air-to-air interrogator (AAI), countermeasures dispenser
(CMD), and when to anticipate weapons employment. Once the agenda is
established, you must detail the division of labor. Many of the above
items may be “standard” for your squadron or a familiar crew, but still
must be clearly understood before you step. This drastically reduces the
amount of verbal communication required—both intercockpit and over the
radios. Obviously, the best laid plan will not work if there are no
disciplined communication procedures. The crew brief must establish who
will have primary control of the radios during what phase of the
engagement and when those roles will change. Of course, common sense
prevails if there is an emergency or dangerous situation developing. Then
it is everyone’s responsibility to avoid trouble. The bottom line is that a
disciplined intercockpit/UHF comm plan that emphasizes minimal,
concise, and pertinent transmissions will enhance everyone’s situational
awareness. A general game plan on how to handle emergencies could
make a potentially dangerous situation more benign.

AAM-3 D-4


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_11.jpeg:
Flight Tasks

There are air-to-air flight tasks each aircrew is required to accomplish on
a typical medium-to-high altitude air-to-air mission. These tasks can be
divided into four separate phases: beyond visual range (BVR), from BVR
to the tally, merge, and postmerge.

Beyond Visual Range Task

The most important task to accomplish before any engagement is to
prepare yourselves and your jet. Ensure that you have done an extensive
FENCE check. Essential items to include in this check are the status of
your weapons, radar setup, CMD position, fuel state, and RWR operation.
Be sure that you have performed a good G warm-up. Accomplishing these
tasks prior to starting an engagement will alleviate the task saturation of
the actual fight. You must also have a briefed contract with your flight.
Depending on the tactics briefing, visual contact must be maintained
among the flight members. Anytime the “visual” is lost, a “blind” call
must be made and some sort of deconfliction plan within the block should
be executed. Ensure that all flight members fly their briefed formation
position. As the engagement begins, use GCI/AWACS to build your
situational awareness. Execute your crew-briefed game plan. Deviations
from this will require excess intercockpit chatter that will decrease
efficiency. A standard scenario for division of duties is for the WSO to
initially run the radar and avionics while the pilot maintains the visual,
formation within the block, and 6 o’clock coverage. The pilot must also
look down track for the tally-ho and possible contrails. Again, minimum
intercockpit communication is essential so as not to miss a safety of flight
or directive threat call. Remember, the most important concern is to keep
your flight path deconflicted from all players. If other tasks begin to
distract you from doing this, return to the basics and do not be afraid to
admit it.



Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_12.jpeg:
BVR to Tally

During this phase, the “big sky” is beginning to get smaller. More
emphasis should now be given to flight path deconfliction. It is common
procedure for the roles to change when the final sort is established. Ina
verbal exchange, the pilot should pass the visual to the WSO, take control
of the radar anticipating medium range radar shots, and use the HUD to
try and acquire the tally.

The WSO should acknowledge he has the visual, assume responsibility for
6 o'clock coverage, monitor shot parameters, and accomplish other tasks as
required. It is important to note that close proximity to the merge usually
incorporates timing out missiles, making kill calls, expending chaff/flares
and executing IRCM, all of which can reduce your overall situational
awareness. Do not get channelized on one specific task. As you convert on
the bandits, be vigilant for big altitude stacks, wide splits, trailers, or any
other bandit maneuvers. Endgame maneuvering in this environment has
the potential to infringe on training rule violations. Watch out for the other
guy and remember the basics.

Merge

This is the most demanding task phase of the air-to-air arena. Your
primary objective is to kill the bandit, but there are a lot of other variables
which factor into a successful engagement. All your attention must be
outside the cockpit now. When you see other players, do not assume they
see you. It is very easy to get channelized on your own flight and
disregard everyone else. It is also often difficult to discern if those other
players are offensively or defensively engaged. Fall back on your
crew-briefed procedures as to who is looking where. The pilot should be
out front while the WSO picks up “six” coverage and monitors the floor
transition. Do not blindly enter an engagement without having
situational awareness on where everyone is. If you become task
saturated, leave the fight. When the situation deteriorates with too many
airplanes in close proximity, a “knock-it-off’? may be appropriate.

AAM-3 D-6


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_13.jpeg:
Postmerge

When it comes time to leave the fight, your tasking is far from over. Try
to get away from the merge as quickly as possible while using your short
range radar game plan to clear in front of you. Use your eyeballs
primarily to clear near threats. Again, fall back on your crew brief as to
who is clearing what side of the aircraft and high or low. Prioritize your
visual scan toward the merge then back to the standard visual lookout.
Extend in straight lines. Regain or maintain mutual support with your
flight, but do not sacrifice your own deconfliction to make it happen.
GCI/AWACS and intraflight communication can be invaluable to build or
regain situational awareness on egress. Once your flight is together and
on the way home, the engagement is over.

Low Altitude Environment

Up to now we have looked at air-to-air tasking in the medium altitude
environment. When you move your operations down close to the ground,
your tasks and priorities change. Your attention must be directed more
toward terrain clearance. This is a look at low altitude conversions and
their associated concerns.

Low-to-High Conversions

Low-to-high conversions require evaluation of both vertical and horizontal
maneuvering room. The optimum maneuver is a chandelle that uses both
vertical and horizontal offset to a low 6 o’clock position on the bandit,
striving to never leave his blind zone. The tally is usually not difficult to
obtain in this regime unless there is a significant altitude delta. The
pilot’s main concern down low is terrain avoidance, but requires less
attention in the conversion phase since the vector is away from the
ground.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_14.jpeg:
The WSO should watch terrain clearance at low altitude, maintain the
visual while alternately checking the radar, clearing 6 o’clock, and helping
to attain the tally. Although terrain avoidance becomes less of a
consideration once your vector is pointed toward the merge, there are a
couple of situations that deserve attention: 1) Do not attempt to square
the corner in the final conversion and end up nose high and slow at low
altitude. Overshooting with energy is a much better option. 2) After
operating close to the ground, 2000 feet AGL may give you the illusion of
being higher than you are. Do not be complacent; be aware of any
downward vector.

High-to-Low Conversions

GCI, AWACS, and radar will enable detection of low altitude threats.
BVR rules of engagement may simplify employment, but certain
situations will dictate conversions into the low altitude regime to employ
weapons. Target terrain masking, camouflage, and lost radar locks in the
final conversion are potential pitfalls. Do not let your zest to kill the
bandit preclude you from maintaining the “big picture.” The ground is
still your primary threat. Both crew members should be monitoring
descent rate, speed, and nose position while the WSO has more of an
opportunity to check six and maintain the visual. Attempt to get most of
your conversion turn out of the way early to minimize aggressive vertical
maneuvering down low at endgame. Plan your conversion to end up
slightly higher than the target’s altitude so an overshoot will not put you
into the ground. Letting your speed get out of control is a killer. Staying
high on the bandit will also allow for airspeed advantages for a tail chase.

Co-Altitude Intercepts

Terrain masking by the bandit will be more of a problem in this regime.
Predicting his new position may be the only option. The pilot should give
his undivided attention to the terrain and maintaining the tally while the
WSO clears six, works the radar, and maintains visual if required. The
radar should work fine in flat or slightly hilly terrain, but weapons
employment will be tougher in the low-to-low profile.

AAM-3 D-8


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_15.jpeg:
Conversion Aborts

This is a major concern in high-to-low intercepts. Avoid a pure
high-to-low “split S” type conversion. Rolling more than 135° is not
advised. If at any time you exceed dive recovery safety parameters or the
conversion “feels” uncomfortable, roll wings level and recover. Both crew
members are responsible for maintaining terrain clearance, but the WSO
must be prepared to maneuver the aircraft away from the ground in case
of unforseen problems such as pilot spatial disorientation or a bird strike.

Flying tactical airplanes is inherently dangerous! As past mishaps prove
over and over again, flying in the air-to-air arena is even more dangerous.
You, the tactical aviator and brevet F-15E aircrew, can decrease your
chance of becoming a statistic while training like you are going to fight if
you follow the basic principles of preparation, and are cognizant of how to
maintain SA during critical phases of the air-to-air scenario.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_16.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Both crew members are responsible for terrain avoidance in the low
altitude regime.

a. True
b. False
2. Since the air-to-air environment is so dynamic, prebriefed crew

coordination is not important.

a. True
b. False

AAM-3 D-10


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_17.jpeg:
ANSWERS

AAM-3


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_18.jpeg:
TRAIL DEPARTURE
Purpose

The purpose of a trail departure is to get a flight of two or more airborne
when conditions do not permit a formation takeoff or rejoin out of traffic.
Wet runways, crosswind limits, stores configuration differences, low
ceilings, or poor visibility are normally the deciding factors. The flight
lead’s responsibility is to fly the published departure as briefed. The
wingman’s overriding priority is to MAINTAIN AIRCRAFT CONTROL
while flying the published departure and maintaining the briefed
separation from lead. The pilot should concentrate on instrument flying
while the WSO monitors the departure and attempts to get a radar lock
on the leader.

Before Takeoff

Prior to takeoff, review the departure and set up the radar. Have the
departure plate out and the navigation displays set up properly. All flight
members should listen carefully to the clearance and controlling agencies
for nonstandard or unpublished restrictions.

The following parameters give the best setup for the radar.

e A/Amaster mode (MM) selected. The HUD will have digital range
printout, but it will not have bank indices in the A/A MM. EADI
should be used for IMC conditions.

e Radar display options:
e Range: 10 nm A/A radar scope.
e Azimuth: 60° sweep (consider 30° sweep if the departure is
basically straight ahead).
e Bar scan: 4/6.

e Frame store: 1/2.

e ACQ symbols positioned at 1.5-2 nm.

AAM-3 D-12


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_19.jpeg:
e = Elevation - set the antenna elevation approximately 5-8° high, or to
read field elevation and higher in the altitude data block. NOTE:
After the two-second weight off wheels transmitter 111 test, the acq
symbols reset to half display. The acq symbols must be brought back
to 1.5-2 nm and the desired elevation reset after this test is complete.

e AAT should be used to confirm that the radar target is your flight
member. Use correct code (CC) mode and auto AAI set to PDT or
STT. For two-ship trail, both lead and wingman can use the same or
different squawks. In a 4-ship, it is recommended to have a common
Mode 1 for the flight and a separate Mode 2 for each position to make
it easier to identify each flight member. The last member of the
flight will squaawk Mode 3 Code XX00, where XX is the first two
digits of the flight’s Mode 3; i.e., lead has 4212, four has 4200. AAT
does not require weight off wheels; therefore, wingmen can verify
proper AAI operation while taxiing to quick check or as preceding
flight members release brakes on takeoff roll.

Takeoff

Make a normal takeoff with 20 seconds spacing. This spacing gets lead
airborne before number two releases brakes.

After takeoff, the target normally appears at 1.5-2 nm. After establishing
a safe climb, attempt to manually lock on to the preceding aircraft. Once
the radar target is acquired, and while continuing to cross-check the flight
instruments, use manual or auto AAI to confirm contact on the correct
target. When assured of the correct radar target, say so on the radio,
“Call sign, TIED.” If this call is omitted, lead makes the calls required by
AFT 11-2F-15E.

The radar lock may be broken to clear the flight path. Use the AAI to
keep track of lead’s azimuth and range, reacquiring lock to check overtake
and aspect. Accelerate to the briefed climb airspeed, and set the throttles
to the prebriefed power setting. Part of the instrument cross-check
includes the closing velocity (Vc) on the A/A RDR/HUD. Vc gives an
additional cue to airspeed control.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the

F-15E, its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but
is to be used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications
and technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-3, July, 1998

OPDR: 4TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_20.jpeg:
Maintaining Trail

During constant heading segments of the SID, use small heading changes
to maintain zero aspect angle (AA) or tail (T) on the AA readout.
Wingmen may offset the preceding aircraft slightly to avoid jetwash.
Strong crosswinds cause the aircraft in front to be offset from the expected
no-wind position and the aircrew may notice a 10° left (1L) or 10° right
(1R) aspect when stabilized. A cross-check for TD box movement is useful
in detecting drift and when lead stops or starts a turn. Check lead’s
heading on the A/A RDR display and compare it to the SID.

Anticipate lead’s turns on the SID. To maintain trail in turns, the rule of
thumb is for 30° of bank, allow the target to drift 5° for each mile in trail;
i.e., 10° for two mile trail (Figure D-1). To maintain the briefed spacing,

use lead or lag pursuit while complying with the SID restrictions.

10 NM

TEC =
| B: 3 NM/15°
__ C: 4 NM/20°
— - Ve + Vc D: 5 NM/25°

G 485 T 480 AAM-03-04

Figure D - 1. Sync Points for 30° Bank Trail.

AAM-3 D-14


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_21.jpeg:
If the lead aircraft is kept on the sync line, the Vc will be zero. If the lead
aircraft is allowed to drift to the left of the sync line (for a left turn), you
will be lagging and a negative Vc will develop. This will result in an
increase in range. If the lead aircraft is placed to the right of the sync
line, a positive Vc will develop resulting in a decrease in range.
Power/airspeed can be used, but is the least desirable means of
maintaining spacing because of the accordion effect on number three and
number four in a four-ship trail.

Fly the SID precisely and maintain appropriate altitude separation [AW
AFI 11-2F-15E if there are no radar contacts. Make all SID turns,
level-offs, and course changes. Fly good instruments, maintain airspeed,
follow the SID, and there will not be a conflict. Even without a radar
contact, lead should be within a few degrees and 2 nm of the nose when
breaking out on top of the clouds.

Loss of Radar Contact

If radar contact is lost, immediately notify lead. Continue to fly the SID.
The flight lead will call all turns and use 30° bank. In climbs or descents,
each aircraft/element will call passing each 5000 foot altitude increment
with altitude and heading. All members of the flight will call any
heading/altitude changes. Maintain 1000 feet altitude separation on
level-off.

The most common causes of “no contact” during the trail departure are not
flying the SID and not pointing the radar beam in the right direction
(azimuth and elevation). Once properly positioned, use a disciplined radar
search and the AAI.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_22.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The recommended method for obtaining a radar lock on a trail
departure is for the pilot to use supersearch to lock the lead aircraft.

a. True

b. False

2. Without a radar contact, each aircraft will call altitudes every
feet and all heading changes.

a. 1000
b. 3000
c. 5000
d. 10,000

AAM-3 D-16


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_23.jpeg:
ANSWERS

AAM-3


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_24.jpeg:
AIR REFUELING
Mission Preparation

Prior to the flight brief, obtain the tanker call sign, refueling track,
refueling altitude block, fuel offload, refueling frequencies, and air
refueling control time (ARCT). Note the position, coordinates, and
TACAN fixes associated with the air refueling initial point (ARIP) and the
air refueling control point (ARCP). This data can be found in flight
information publications (FLIP) area planning (AP)/1B or local in-flight
guides.

Ground Operations

Check the aircraft forms to ensure the aircraft is air refuelable. After
start, ensure the slipway door opens and closes properly, and the air
refueling READY light and receptacle lights illuminate with the door
open.

En Route

Set up the radar controls to search the tanker’s altitude block. Maintain
the briefed position in the formation. Obtain the tanker’s Mode 3 IFF to
enable positive ID with the AAI. Ensure the master arm switch is in
SAFE. Set the correct altimeter setting.

Rendezvous Geometry

There are two methods of rendezvousing with the tanker: the point
parallel and the fighter turn-on.

Brief and use GCI to the maximum extent, but always monitor the
geometry to ensure an efficient rendezvous. Use the radar and A/A
TACAN to monitor the rendezvous geometry to detect deviations as they
develop (e.g., insufficient lateral separation or excessive heading crossing
angle). Maintain altitude separation with the tanker until visual and
complete the hot armament safety check prior to putting the tanker in the
lethal envelope for the weapons you are carrying. The wingman’s primary
responsibility is to maintain formation position. This is especially
important when acquiring a tally on the tanker. There is a great potential
for midair collision at this point, and all crew members must maintain
strict discipline to avert it.

AAM-3 D-18


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_25.jpeg:
Point Parallel

Point parallel rendezvous (Figure D-2) is normally used anytime the
tanker has no aircraft refueling and the tanker is positioned at the ARCP.
Normally, radio contact is established with the tanker prior to arriving at
the ARIP. EMCON 2 is used as the normal air refueling communication
procedure IAW TO 1-1C-1-25. If both the tanker and receivers are on a
common GCI/FAA frequency, the change to the air refueling frequency
may be delayed until positive radar/visual contact is established. If under
radar control, obtain bearing and distance to the tanker prior to changing
to the air refueling frequency. As soon as reliable radio contact has been
established with the tanker, DME/radial information from a common
TACAN should be exchanged (if available). You must be cleared by the
tanker to depart the ARIP. Maintain 1000 feet below the tanker until
visual contact is made with the tanker.

26° LEFT AT 21 NM
TANKER TURNS TO
REFUELING HEADING

ARIP RECEIVER
HOLDING POINT

®

ARCP / TANKER
ORBIT POINT
2 MIN LEGS >”

AAM-03-02

Figure D - 2. Point Parallel Rendezvous.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_26.jpeg:
Proceed from the ARIP to the ARCP using all aids necessary to maintain
the track. To provide range information, one flight member normally sets
the assigned A/A TACAN prior to the ARIP. All flight members normally
monitor the rendezvous on their own radars. If the rendezvous is
proceeding properly, lead tells the tanker to begin his turn to the refueling
heading at 26° azimuth on the radar at 21 nm range. A typical
rendezvous radar display is depicted in Figure D-3.

40 NM

A: TANKER STARTS TURN
B: TANKER IN THE TURN
C: TANKER HALFWAY
THROUGH TURN
(34°, 8 NM)

D: TANKER ROLLS OUT
OF TURN

G 485 T 480

AAM-03-03

Figure D - 3. Point Parallel Rendezvous Radar Depiction.

AAM-3 D - 20


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_27.jpeg:
The terminal stage of the rendezvous is critical. The point parallel
rendezvous with proper airspeed rolls the tanker out 3 nm in front of the
receivers. If the tanker turns too late or too slowly, an overshoot may
develop. If the tanker turns early or rapidly, a “cold” rollout (the tanker
more than 3 nm ahead of the receiver) results. During the tanker’s turn,
the tanker should be 34° left at 8 nm when halfway through the turn.
Refer to Table D-1 for a depiction of point parallel rendezvous data.

Se
[sme

Table D - 1. Point Parallel Rendezvous Data.

If range is less at a checkpoint, ease back on the power and advise the
tanker to push it up while performing a slight check turn away from the
tanker. If range is greater at a checkpoint, add power and turn slightly
toward the tanker. Checkpoints are based on the following conditions:

Tanker 275 KCAS/FL 280
Fighter 310 KCAS/FL 250

As a rule of thumb, changing fighter airspeed to 350 KCAS decreases
roll-out distance by 2 nm, thus allowing the fighters to roll out
approximately 1 nm behind the tanker. The critical factor is to ensure
altitude separation until established behind the tanker with visual
contact. Refueling airspeed is 310 KCAS, so the tanker is awaiting a
“push it up” call.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_28.jpeg:
66 - d S-NVV

“ToyuBy oY} PUTYoq
[le1} WU G°Z UL AT[VULAIOU o1e S10jY.STJ oY} ‘UINY SITY} Jo UOTJeTdUIOD
841 ITV “e421 OINSO]D porlsep oy} SASTYIe 0} pepsou se pooedsute 11eyy
ysnlpe siojysy oy, ‘poodsite Suljenjes 7e ST 1oyUey oY4 ‘MO}-UT-SYITYO
UIIM ‘pee] USI ey} Aq pojsonber usyM poods.te Suljenjer
Soysl[qe4se JeyUv} oy], “UIN} Iley} Ysno1yy Aemgey ore S10} YSTy

oy} UsyM WU GP pue SULIvEq OATIETOL []) 4e OG P[NoYs JeyUe, OUT, =e

‘WIN} oY} SULINP Yue JO .Cg BSN S19}YSY oyy, e@

‘yuourysn(pe poodsire ue SoYeoTPUL 94e1 DINSOTD
aU} [IJUN SNoOAzepual oY} JNOYSNoIy} SYOM OGE uleyurew siojysiq e

‘eSUBRI JULIS WU CT pue SULIvEq OAI}EOL
oG& 7@ ST JoyUey oY} USM JOyUL} OY} PAPMOJ UIN] S10}YSTY out, oe

“‘IOYUL} OY} JO PVO}SUI UIN} S1OJYSY oy, =e

“MOTEq Sdo}s OY} AMOTIOF 10
SNOAZOpUSL UO-UIN} Joys B 10J Sonbruyse} ydeo10}UI TeULIOU esn ABU NOX

‘SNOAZOpUSyY UO-UWIN], 1oyYysIy ‘P - q eInsty

v0-€0-WVV

NYNL MNVE .O€ SVO™ OLE

‘uleyjyed 1oyoue ue

UL ST LOYUL} OY} UOYM IO ‘SNOAZOPUOL S}I SULSOq JUST JXou oy} se SuIToNnjor
[IQS SI USI ouo pue JoyUL} OUIeS OY} 1OJ pornpeypos sisi] [e1eAes a1
0104} USA pesn AT[e.10UNS SI (P-(| OANGIY) SNOAZOpUSL UO-UAINY 104YST OU,

U0-UIN], 1eyysty


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_29.jpeg:
Rendezvous Overrun

When a rendezvous overrun occurs, the tanker or receiver immediately
transmits a warning to all members of the flight and initiates rendezvous
overrun procedures. In the event of an overrun, the receiver(s) pass 1000
feet below the tanker to ensure positive vertical separation. The receivers
decelerate to 290 KCAS or buffet onset and maintain air refueling
heading. The tanker accelerates to 355 KIAS (3850 KCAS) or Mach 0.90,
whichever is lower, and maintains air refueling heading. When the
tanker is in positive visual contact ahead of the receiver, the receiver so
indicates. The tanker decelerates to air refueling airspeed and normal
closure procedures are employed to establish contact.

Prerefueling Checks

Follow procedures detailed in TO 1-1C-25CL-1 (“BRITTS” check: Beacon,
Radar, IFF, TACAN, TEWS, Slipway). Basically, ensure all forward firing
ordnance is safe and all aircraft systems which emit electrical signals are
in a standby mode (emissions limiting [EMIS LMT] is available). Set up
the fuel panel as briefed. As the flight approaches the tanker, the
refueling boom operator initiates a radio check which must be
acknowledged by each flight member (emissions control [EMCON]

option 1).

Refueling positions, refueling techniques and abnormal/emergency
procedures are discussed in AFTTP 3-3.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

C
a O
\f_ err ta H

COVER

A/A MISSION TASKS
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to familiarize you with F-15E air-to-air mission
tasks, trail departures procedures, and the preparation and tasks
associated with air refueling. It also covers some aspects of crew
coordination and how they relate to the mission. It provides you with the
knowledge needed to more efficiently perform the air-to-air mission.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.00. eeeccceeseeesseeceseeseesaeecesacecensaeeeesaeeessaeeseenaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eeccccccessseecceesseeeecessseeecesesaeeeceesssaeeeseesssaeeesesssaeeeseeeeaaeeseee D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ o.oo eeecceessneeesseeeeesaeecesaeeeensaeesesaeeseseeeeeaees E-1
GLOSSARY. ee eeceeesecessneecesseeecesaeecesaeecessaeecesaeeseesaeecesaaesessaeeseeaeeeneas F-1


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_30.jpeg:
Postair Refueling

Complete the postair refueling checklist and check the fuel gauge to
ensure receipt of the proper amount of fuel and correct distribution in the
tanks. Flight formation after refueling is as briefed. Once the flight
departs the tanker and in-flight conditions permit, mentally transition to
the upcoming mission phase. Reset switches as necessary, and prepare for
the FENCE check. Simple mistakes such as entering an engagement with
the master arm in SAFE are more prevalent following in-flight refueling.

After Landing
Write up any discrepancies in the air refueling system noted during the
mission. Be sure to enter the in-flight refueling offload in the Air Force

Technical Order (AFTO) Form 781. Prior to shutdown, open the slipway
door and leave it open for maintenance postflight inspection.

AAM-3 D - 24


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_31.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

With chicks-in-tow on the tanker, you should expect a
rendezvous.

Point parallel
Fighter turn-on
Stern conversion
Collision course

pe op

After a visual is achieved, the receivers may climb to the tanker’s
altitude.

a. True

b. False

Refueling airspeed to get a 3 nm rollout is KCAS
tanker/receiver.

a. 275/310

b. 275/350

c. 310/310

d. 310/350


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_32.jpeg:
1 b
2. a
3. a

AAM-3

ANSWERS


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_33.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

During a trail departure, the

pilot should concentrate on instrument flying.

pilot should concentrate on maintaining the briefed spacing.
WSO should monitor the SID and work the radar.

WSO should monitor the spacing.

ae op

As number four in a trail, you can use the AAI on the ground to see
the spacing of 1/2/83.

a. True

b. False

Radar lock is required to make the “TIED” call.

a. True

b. False

In a point parallel rendezvous, the receivers may depart the ARIP at
the ARCT.

a. True

b. False

Normal altitude separation between tanker and receivers is
feet.

a. 1000
b. 2000
c. 3000
d. 4000


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_34.jpeg:
Tanker acceleration to refueling airspeed is automatic upon reaching
the refueling heading.

a. True

b. False

During OVERRIDE refueling, the tanker can initiate disconnects.
a. True

b. False

Postlanding actions for refueling missions include

leave slipway open.

go to STOP REFUEL.

select FEED on fuel gauge.
enter fuel offload in 781.

ao op

The crew coordination briefing in the F-15E

a. should center around the division of duties within the jet
throughout all phases of the A/A engagement.

b. is standard and does not require briefing.

c. should include who will talk on the radio.

d. should include who will control the radar.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_35.jpeg:
A/A

ACQ

AFTO
AGL
AP
ARCP
ARCT
ARIP
AWACS
BVR
CC
CMD
DME
EADI

EMCON

EMIS LMT

FAA

FL

GLOSSARY
Aspect angle
Air-to-air
Acquisition
Air-to-air interrogator
Air Force Technical Order
Above ground level
Area planning
Air refueling control point
Air refueling control time
Air refueling initial point
Airborne warning and control system
Beyond visual range
Correct code
Countermeasures dispenser
Distance measuring equipment
Electronic attitude director indicator
Emissions control
Emissions limiting
Federal Aviation Administration

Flight level


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_36.jpeg:
FLIP

GCI

HUD

IAW

ID

IFF

IMC

IRCM

KCAS

KIAS

MM

hm

PDT

RDR

RWR

SA

SID

STT

AAM-3

Flight information publications
Ground controlled intercept
Head-up display

In accordance with
Identification

Identification friend or foe
Instrument meteorological conditions
Infrared countermeasures
Calibrated airspeed in knots
Knots indicated airspeed

Left

Master mode

Nautical miles

Primary designated target
Right

Radar

Radar warning receiver
Situation awareness

Standard instrument departure
Single target track

Tail


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_37.jpeg:
TACAN

TD

UHF

WSO

Tactical air navigation
Target designator
Ultra high frequency
Closing velocity

Weapon system officer

AAM-3


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_38.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the preparation and tasks required to maintain aircrew
situation awareness while successfully, and safely, executing an
air-to-air mission.

2. Identify the procedures for a trail departure.

3. Identify preparation and tasks for air refueling.

REFERENCES

AFTTP 3-3 VOL XVII Chapter 3-2, Trail Departures
Chapter 6, Air Refueling

AFT 11-2F-15E

AAM-3 B-1


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read the reference material.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-3

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
A/A ENVIRONMENT

Operating in the air-to-air environment is hazardous due to the many
different variables in the air-to-air equation. Other aircraft, high G turns,
and aircrew pride are just a few of the variables which make the air-to-air
environment so dynamic. The F-15E has an advantage over single seat
aircraft in that the two crew members can help accomplish the multitude
of required tasks or detect unplanned flight deviations. Although the
F-15E has an outstanding flying safety record, the air-to-air environment
remains an extremely dangerous place for the unprepared aircrew.

Preparation

Before ever strapping on the jet for an air-to-air engagement, the aircrew
must prepare themselves both physically and mentally. This preparation
process can be broken down into three main areas: physiological

preparation, systems knowledge, and crew coordination.

Physiological Preparation

Today’s fighters have the ability to exceed human performance
capabilities. Usually you strap in and go fly to the edge of the
performance envelope without experiencing any problems. However, if
you neglect to physiologically prepare yourself for flight, you will find
yourself repeatedly behind the airplane. Physiological preparation
revolves around your physical, psychological, and pathological condition.


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_8.jpeg:
Physical

To maximize your physical status you need to eat properly and ensure you
are properly hydrated. You need at least 1200 calories per day to
maintain performance at an adequate level. You should eat at least two
meals each day, one of which should be breakfast. A poor diet will result
in fatigue problems, including muscle fatigue, which will seriously affect
your G tolerance. Dehydration also has a negative effect on your G
tolerance and induces early fatigue. One way to try to ensure proper
hydration is to drink water before flights, during flights (if possible), and
after flights. The best way to monitor hydration status is by the color of
your urine. Ifthe urine is very yellow, you are dehydrated. You should
drink water and avoid dehydrating agents like alcohol, coffee, and teas.
Try to exercise on a regular basis to enhance physical status. Limited
aerobic training (two or three times a week) combined with weight
training (two or three times a week) will prepare you for the strenuous
air-to-air environment.

Psychological

The psychological component is tougher to prepare. Some stress in our
lives is good because it improves performance. However, if there is a large
amount of stress in your life you will find your performance will suffer.
You will find you are more easily distracted, less attentive to your in-flight
duties, and much more susceptible to attention problems like channelized
attention, task saturation, and complacency. If you feel good physically,
but are unsure of your psychological status, you must ensure a thorough
preflight mission planning session to prepare for any unusual events that
could surface during the mission. By planning for the unusual you will be
ready to respond should the unusual actually occur. If you are under
extreme stress, fatigued, and find your thought processes slow and
uncoordinated, take yourself off the flying schedule for a short while until
you are in better shape to fly.

AAM-3 D-2


Text from AAM-3_Air-to-Air_Mission_Tasks_page_9.jpeg:
Pathological

Pathological status refers to whether you are healthy or sick. Flight
doctors and physiologists tell you not to fly when you are sick because you
might develop ear blocks and/or sinus blocks. Sickness dulls the senses,
reduces situational awareness, and slows your reactions—just what a
fighter aircrew member does not need. Do not self-medicate in an attempt
to feel better for the flight. This action is prohibited by flight doctors,
physiologists, and especially Air Force regulations. If you are sick, go to
the flight surgeon and let the doctor decide whether you should fly or not.
Do not try some nonprescription “miracle drug” to make you “feel good”
long enough to complete the mission. You are only asking for a possible
problem that could end your career.

By working to ensure you are physiologically prepared to fly, you will not
only enhance flight safety, but also see improved personal performance.
Before each briefing take a minute to check your physical, psychological,
and pathological status (kind of a human body preflight check). If
everything checks out good, go fly, fight, and win.

Systems Knowledge

Another integral part of aircrew preparation is thorough knowledge of the
aircraft systems. Although the F-15E is a very forgiving airplane, past
mishaps have shown that when aircraft or configuration limits are
exceeded the jet can become susceptible to departure, go out-of-control,
and be unrecoverable depending on altitude, energy state, and proximity
to the ground. It is essential that the aircrews know and adhere to all
F-15E Dash 1 restrictions and limitations. They must also be intimately
familiar with Section III of the Dash 1 concerning emergency procedures.
An out-of-control aircraft or other critical emergency situation requires
timely and proper procedures to safely recover the aircraft. By studying
and staying current with the Dash 1, aircrews will be more aware and
better prepared for all contingencies.


