Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-5
OFFENSIVE BASIC FIGHTER
MANEUVERS (OBFM)

DECEMBER 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_10.jpeg:
Positional Geometry

The three concepts of range, aspect angle and angle off [heading crossing
angle (HCA)] describe one aircraft’s position relative to another

(Figure D-2). The combination of these terms describes which aircraft has
a positional advantage and how much advantage exists.

N

ANGLE-OFF
(HCA)

ASPECT ANGLE /
(TARGET TO

ATTACKER)

AAM-05-02

Figure D - 2. Range, Aspect Angle and Angle Off.

Range The distance between two aircraft.

Aspect Angle The relative position of the attacker to the target
without regard to the attacker’s heading. Strictly
speaking, aspect angle is measured from the tail of the
target to the position of the attacker. Tail aspect is
zero and head aspect is 180°.

Angle Off (HCA) The angle between the longitudinal axis of the attacker
and the longitudinal axis of the defender. Whenever
the attacker is pointing at the defender, aspect angle
and angle off are the same.

AAM-5 D-4


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_11.jpeg:
Attack Geometry

There are three available attack pursuit courses: lead, lag and pure
(Figure D-3). The attacker’s nose position and lift vector relative to a
target contribute to the pursuit course flown. These geometries are
three-dimensional.

In-plane If the attacker is in the bandit’s plane of motion, the
position of the attacker’s nose determines the pursuit
course. An attacker pointing at the adversary is in pure
pursuit. An attacker pointing behind the bandit is in lag
pursuit. With the nose pointed in front of the bandit, the
attacker is in lead pursuit.

AAM-05-03

Figure D - 3. Pursuit Curves.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_12.jpeg:
Out-of-plane When out of the defender’s plane of motion, the attacker’s
pursuit course is determined by where the present lift
vector will position the nose when reentering the defender’s
turn plane. For example, after gaining sufficient turning
room out of the adversary’s turn plane, the attacker that
pulls far enough in front of the bandit to arrive back
in-plane with the nose in front of the defender is in lead
pursuit. The same holds true for pure or lag pursuit.

Weapon Employment Zone (WEZ)

The primary goal of offensive BFM is to maneuver to a position to kill the
bandit. The area around the adversary from where you can employ
ordnance defines the weapons employment zone (WEZ). The size of the
WEZ depends on the types of ordnance available, airspeed, altitude,
aspect angle, angle off and aircraft turn capability. See AFTTP 3-1 Vol I
for specific weapon employment zones.

Turning Room/Turn Circle

Turning Room

Turning room is the distance between the two aircraft that either aircraft
may use to accelerate and decrease range or to turn and enter the turn
circle. Turning room exists both in and out of the adversary’s plane of
motion.

Turn Circle

The turn circle is a mental projection of the defensive turn over time
(Figure D-4). The size of the turn circle varies with changes in the
adversary’s TAS and G loading. If the attacker’s range to the defender is
greater than the defenders turn diameter, the attacker is outside the
defender’s turn circle. It is important to recognize when you are inside the
defender’s turn circle because when you are there, the bandit cannot turn
hard enough to move you forward of the 3/9 line.

AAM-5 D-6


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_13.jpeg:
Observing and predicting the defender’s turn will create the visual cues
that allow you to recognize when you enter the defender’s turn circle. If
the attacker observes forward line of sight (LOS) movement by the
defender, then the attacker is inside the defender’s turn circle. Another
visual cue is the defender’s aspect angle remains constant or begins to
decrease.

AAM-05-04

Figure D - 4. Turn Circle.

D-7 AAM-5


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_14.jpeg:
Control Zone

The control zone (Figure D-5) is a position along the bandit’s turn circle
from which you can maintain pressure on or “control” the bandit. From
this position, you can rapidly move into a WEZ once you have achieved an
energy advantage or the bandit makes a mistake.

The available weapons envelopes and the defender’s aircraft performance
define the control zone. It is important to recognize weapons envelopes
and develop judgement as to how far away, in terms of time, you are from
the weapons employment zone. The inner limit of the control zone allows
time to react to bandit maneuvers and position for an accurate gun shot,
or maintain minimum weapons range or minimum separation for training
rules. It also allows the attacker to reposition the nose to establish a lead
pursuit curve to enter a WEZ. The closer you get to the inner limit, the
more important it is to have aspect angle, angle off, and closure under
control. At the outer limit of the control zone, you can have more aspect
angle, angle off and closure problems, but you run the risk of taking
pressure off the bandit.

Considering F-15E performance and energy management at medium
altitude, we can establish some generic physical boundaries on the control
zone (Figure D-5).

20° AA

2500'

=

+ 30 HCA 3

50° AA AAM-05-05
Figure D - 5. The Control Zone.

AAM-5 D-8


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_15.jpeg:
This control zone is valid for F-15E vs F-15E BFM. When encountering a
BFM situation against a dissimilar adversary (F-16, F-18, MiG-29, Su-27,
etc.), understanding the adversaries’ capabilities helps to determine the
control zone.

OFFENSIVE MANEUVERS

These maneuvers allow you to control overtake, get turning room by flying
out of the bandit’s POM and put you in parameters to kill the bandit.
When used correctly, they help you to maintain the advantage and an
acceptable energy level.

Lead Reposition Maneuver

The lead reposition maneuver (Figure D-6) increases closure, decreases
range and/or reduces angle off. To perform this maneuver, increase bank
angle and pull toward the inside of the bandit’s turn circle (Figure D-7).
By over-rotating you gain additional turn rate capability due to increased
radial G. Pull toward the inside of the bandit’s turn circle to establish
lead pursuit. Once in lead, reduce G and accelerate to increase your
energy state, decrease range and increase closure.

<<

Figure D - 6. Lead Reposition.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_16.jpeg:
While holding lead pursuit on the inside of the bandit’s turn, angle off
decreases and fuselages start to align. However, lead pursuit geometry
increases aspect angle as you maneuver across the defender’s turn circle.
This can lead to high closure rates and a possible overshoot. Do not get
too greedy in your bid for lead and bury your nose. Several small lead
repositions are better than one large one. Additionally, one large lead
reposition may telegraph a less than desirable energy state to the bandit.

BANDIT DRIFTS
IN

A TO BANDIT
FORWARD LOS

LIFT
VECTOR

AAM-05-07

Figure D - 7. Lead Reposition, Cockpit View.

AAM-5 D-10


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_17.jpeg:
Lag Reposition Maneuver

The lag reposition maneuver (Figure D-8) primarily controls excess
closure. If the closure or overtake problem is not severe and is caused
solely by an airspeed advantage with fuselages nearly aligned, then
control overtake with a power reduction and/or G onset. If the overtake
problem is more severe, then use out-of-plane maneuvering. Rotate your
lift vector out of the bandit’s plane of motion and pull to out-of-plane lag
pursuit. Be careful not to over-G while rolling as you reposition your lift
vector. Once the closure/aspect problem is under control, reorient your lift
vector and pull back into the bandit’s plane of motion. By doing several
small lag repositions rather than one or two large ones, you can keep
pressure on the bandit with your nose position.

c we

Figure D - 8. Lag Reposition.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_18.jpeg:
The degree of reposition depends on how much closure exists and your
range to the bandit. The earlier you recognize the problem, the less severe
the maneuver needs to be. During the pull out-of-plane, monitor the
bandit’s track along your canopy (Figure D-9). As the bandit’s movement
slows or stops, roll to establish lead pursuit and continue the attack.

You must be very careful when executing lag repositions. If you fly too
high above the bandit, you will exit the control zone. Additionally, if you
do not recognize the bandit’s lift vector on you as you try to go
out-of-plane, you can be forced out of the control zone. The lag maneuver
also tends to reduce aspect angle as you fly toward the bandit’s extended
6 o’clock, but angle off tends to build rapidly. Remember, whenever your
nose is off the bandit, you provide acceleration opportunities to the bandit
and ease the pressure with which you drive the fight.

LIFT VECTOR
ww

TOO MUCH
CLOSURE

<¢--

BANDIT
DRIFTS
OUT

AAM-05-09

Figure D - 9. Lag Reposition, Cockpit View.

AAM-5 D-12


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_19.jpeg:
Quarter Plane

The quarter plane (Figure D-10) is normally thought of as a last ditch
maneuver to preserve nose-tail separation and maintain a position of
offensive advantage. Use this maneuver when faced with a high angle off,
high aspect, high closure and short range situation. It is nothing more
than an extreme lag reposition. To perform the maneuver, roll at least
90° away from the defender’s plane of motion, reduce power (usually to
idle) and pull with high G to control aspect and closure (Figure D-11).

This aggressive out-of-plane maneuver to lag pursuit reduces closure and
aspect, generates turning room, but angle off continues to build. Ifthe
bandit continues to turn, watch for an increasing LOS rate to help
determine when to reorient your lift vector back onto the bandit. When it
looks like you will maintain nose-tail separation (bandit stops moving
back on your canopy), reorient your lift vector and pull toward the control
zone while advancing power back to afterburner. If the bandit attempts to
deny this turning room, reorient your lift vector toward the bandit’s new 6
o'clock and continue to pull. Eventually the bandit will fall off into a
defensive turn or you will enter a scissors. You must continue to monitor
the bandit for a change in the plane of motion or an attempt to separate.

Figure D - 10. Quarter Plane Maneuver.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: AAM-5, February, 1999

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_20.jpeg:
Since the quarter plane is a “last ditch” maneuver to maintain the
offensive, you must be aware of the common errors. Late recognition of
the need for the quarter plane can result in a flight path overshoot and
probable loss of 3/9-line advantage. Recommitting your nose too low may
allow the bandit to force you into a vertical overshoot.

LIFT VECTOR

EXTREME
CLOSURE

BANDIT DRIFTS
OUT

AAM-05-11

Figure D - 11. Quarter Plane, Cockpit View.

AAM-5 D-14


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_21.jpeg:
OFFENSIVE BFM

The name of the game offensively is to achieve a position within a
weapons envelope in the quickest possible time and kill the bandit. A
good working knowledge of your available ordnance and their respective
envelopes is mandatory for success in the air-to-air environment.

Objectives

The primary objective of offensive BFM is to kill the bandit. If you cannot
immediately kill the bandit, maneuver to maintain an offensive advantage
through energy and geometry management. Finally, separate prior to
becoming neutral or defensive. Recognize when the fight is becoming
neutral and get out while you are still in control of the situation.

Offensive BFM Setups

Standard setups are fight floor plus 10,000’ AGL, 480 KCAS and line
abreast at fight start range plus 3000’. Ensure you are recording only the
HUD at the ready call. As a technique, do not reject the HUD pitch ladder
or heading scale. Both aircraft strive to be on altitude +500’, at proper
range and at least 400C to call “READY.” When both call “READY,” lead
will check the flight 45° into the defender. The offender performs a hard
turn and works HOTAS to obtain a radar lock. As a technique, after
locking the bandit, use SRM or GUNS to provide easier range assessment
via the ranging reticle. The offender will call “LOCKED, (RANGE)” and
the defender will reverse to a 2-3 G level turn. The defender is responsible
for controlling the angle to achieve a 4 aspect at the “fight’s on” range.

The offender will maintain pure pursuit (waterline on the TD box) and call
(range) every thousand feet. The fight begins at the briefed “fights on”
range. Aircrews should ensure they have the proper setup airspeed (430
KCAS +10) at the “fights on.” Terminate if the setup parameters are not
precisely achieved.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_22.jpeg:
After a fight terminates, deconflict flight paths, establish a 350 KCAS mil
power climb and strive for a line abreast formation at the proper spacing
for the next setup. Climb to altitude and accelerate to the starting
airspeed. Do not call ready with less than 400 KCAS.

Offensive BFM can be divided into two areas: long range BFM and short
range BFM. Remember that you are not required to do any of these
maneuvers if they are not necessary. However, if the bandit is
uncooperative or you make a mistake, you must maneuver to maintain the
advantage and achieve the desired weapons parameters.

Long Range BFM

Long range offensive BFM begins with a 3/9 advantage at a range outside
of the defender’s projected turn circle (Figure D-12). The initial problem is
one of range. To employ BFM, you must enter the bandit’s turn circle.
Note that the defender has time to generate aspect angle and angle off
problems while the attacker is accelerating toward the turn circle.

The attacker’s goal is to fly to an offset point on the defender’s turn circle,
make a max performance turn (offensive break turn) to a slight flight path
overshoot about one turn radius behind the bandit. Three basic options of
lead, pure and lag pursuit now become players for entry into the bandit’s
turn circle.

AAM-5 D-16


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_23.jpeg:
Lead Pursuit Entry

While outside the turn circle, you can pull all the lead you want. This
entry results in increased aspect, large HCAs, high closure and an
excessive flight path overshoot. You may want to use this when trying for
an AIM-9M followed by a high angle gun shot and a separation (i.e., near
JOKER/BINGO fuel, minimum ordnance and/or fighting a superior
bandit).

, AAM-05-12

Figure D - 12. Lead Entry.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_24.jpeg:
Pure Pursuit Entry

The next option is pure pursuit. When you choose pure pursuit, drive
right at the bandit in the HUD. This forces the defender to turn to honor
your nose, but also lets the bandit build excessive angle problems for you
to solve (Figure D-13). This entry may work well against an inferior
turning bandit, but against a similar turning bandit, it creates similar
problems as the lead pursuit entry.

(1) : . AAM-05-13

Figure D- 13. Pure Entry.

AAM-5 D-18


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_25.jpeg:
Lag Pursuit Entry

A lag entry to the circle means pointing your nose to a place behind the
bandit and flying to the bandit’s turn circle (Figure D-14). The object is to
get there with as much turning room as you can get without going out the
backside of the turn circle. However, you cannot threaten the bandit with
your nose in lag for long periods of time. This takes pressure off, allows
the bandit to accelerate and could extend the time required for the kill.

Ne

| ®

©

AAM-05-14

Figure D - 14. Lag Entry.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_26.jpeg:
Knowing when you enter the bandit’s turn circle requires constant
assessment of your position relative to the bandit’s. As you enter the turn
circle, the bandit’s aspect angle begins to decrease or stabilize. Following
this, the bandit’s line of sight (LOS) rate across the canopy will increase.
This increase in LOS is the biggest clue that you are entering the bandit’s
turn circle.

You may also need vertical turning room, but use caution getting it. The
bandit may deny turning room below the original plane of motion with a
slightly nose low defensive turn. Going for excessive turning room above
the bandit may allow the bandit to use it against you, energy state
permitting. Since the bandit will most likely not go up, to avoid an
airspeed loss, you can usually go for a slight amount of uphill vertical
turning room as you enter the turn circle.

Displace your pursuit course from the center of the bandit’s turn circle
opposite the direction of the defensive turn. One way to do this is to drive
to where the bandit was when the defensive turn began. Continuously
analyze the bandit’s defensive turn, realizing that, as the radius becomes
smaller, the closer to the center of the circle you will have to set your
initial turn. During this initial move, accelerate to slightly above your
corner velocity, or about 450 knots maximum. On longer range setups, a
slight power reduction may be required to remain below 450 knots.

Approaching the turn circle, the bandit should drift about 30-40° and
approach the canopy bow. Entering the turn circle, begin a max rate turn
to hold the bandit no higher than just below the canopy bow. Smoothly
pull to between the single and double rate beeper to get to the max G
allowable. As a technique, if you are below 450 KCAS, pull the stick about
34 the way back to the seat pan until the aircraft digs in and you feel a

6-7 G onset, and then smoothly pull the stick all the way back to the seat
pan. You should be able to achieve greater than 7.5 Gs with this
technique. However, be very aware of your airspeed and altitude, as this
technique is only valid for airspeeds below 450 KCAS and less than

18,000 ft MSL. Remember that above corner velocity, the beeper precedes
any buffet. As airspeed decreases toward corner, anticipate the need to
blend in full AB to sustain a max rate turn. You may have to modulate
power to get through corner velocity quickly. This max rate turn normally
results in a turn radius as good as or better than the defender’s. Also, the
energy advantage obtained before the attacker’s break turn often results
in a slight flight path overshoot. This slight overshoot should occur no
closer than one turn radius behind the defender. Bring the nose back
inside the turn circle for a second offensive BFM move. This should put
you closer, slower and with fewer angles in relation to the bandit. For

AAM-5 D - 20


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_27.jpeg:
example if you started at 9000 feet, you should now be around 6000 feet.
During the pull back inside, the geometry may allow a low aspect missile
shot against an inferior turning adversary.

Once established on or inside the bandit’s turn circle, use short range
BFM to fly to the control zone. From the control zone you can continue to
pressure the bandit while maintaining or regaining energy and eventually
employ weapons.

Short Range BFM

Short range offensive BFM begins at, or slightly inside, the turn circle and
behind the bandit’s 3/9 line. Once inside the turn circle, the objective is to
control aspect, angle-off and range while maneuvering toward a position
to employ ordnance.

At the start of a short-range BFM engagement, entry into the bandit’s
turn circle is much like the long range BFM problem. Drive to where the
bandit’s break turn started and evaluate the bandit’s break turn. There
are excellent cockpit references for positioning the bandit while continuing
to threaten with your nose (Figures D-15 and D-16). In your lag
maneuver, position the bandit about 20-30° toward the inside of the turn.
This should be near the center of the inside canopy mirror. When the
bandit’s LOS rate accelerates outside of the mirror, roll back in plane or to
lead and pull the bandit to the top of the canopy bow or top of the HUD.
Continue your pull if within weapons engagement zone range limits and
shoot. If unable to pull the bandit to the HUD, perform another lag
maneuver and accelerate. Repeat these maneuvers until you have
achieved a performance advantage, then pull the bandit to the HUD and
kill him. Remember that multiple small maneuvers are more energy
conserving than one large one, so be patient.

After obtaining a tally, the bandit’s reaction will most likely be an
immediate max performance break turn. The quickest shot opportunity
will occur against a poorer turning aircraft. If your max performance turn
keeps your nose in pure or lead pursuit and inside the defender’s turn
circle, go for a gunshot. Be aware that this method requires that you solve
your BFM and gun sight conditions in minimum time.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_28.jpeg:
If you cannot generate a higher rate turn than the adversary, you will not
be able to go pure pursuit in-plane to shoot and you will remain in a lag
position. The result is most likely a slight flight path overshoot, though it
will be a smaller overshoot than the long range BFM setup. As the
bandit’s LOS rate permits, pull into lead pursuit and setup for the
gunshot.

As you close on the bandit for the gunshot, overtake control is critical in
preventing a gross overshoot. Use out-of-plane maneuvering to control
excess closure against a slow defender. However, if inside the turn circle,
power modulation may be all that is required to match the bandit’s LOS
rate and obtain a gunshot. Put your pipper on the bandit and force a jink
out of plane, reducing angles and Ve.

It is normally necessary to modulate power against a performance-limited
bandit. The intent is to stay at a higher energy state which, assuming the
altitudes are close, implies more calibrated knots.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_29.jpeg:
0° AZIMUTH
20° HIGH

Oe HON 20° RIGHT
10° HIGH

40° LEFT
0° EL q
14° LEFT 14° RIGHT 40° RIGHT
0° AZ 0° EL
0° EL
30° LEFT 40° LOW
25° LOW 30° RIGHT
25° LOW

55° RIGHT

55° LEFT
400 KIAS: HEAD CENTERED ON HEADREST
ta“ SEATING HEIGHT SUCH THAT EYES LOOK SS
FROM TOP OF GLARESHIELD TANGENT TO
RADOME AAM-05-15

Figure D - 14. FCP Canopy Code.

0° AZIMUTH
30° HIGH
20° LEFT
20° HIGH
20° RIGHT
20° HIGH
30° LEFT 30° RIGHT
0° EL 0° EL
oo LOW 45° RIGHT
20° LOW
b
\ 4
Ye /
N

AX HEAD CENTERED é
nm , 00 FCP SEAT FULL UP aT
go. (1100) RCP SEAT FULL UP
(10:00) AAM-05-16

Figure D - 15. RCP Canopy Code.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

q

J tow dso

COVER

OFFENSIVE BASIC FIGHTER MANEUVERS (OBFM)

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide to an understanding of the successful
application of basic fighter maneuvers (BFM). It will familiarize you with
the fundamentals of BFM and factors affecting their performance in the
air-to-air arena. It will provide knowledge needed to effectively employ
the F-15E against an airborne adversary.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0000. eeecceesneeeesneeeeeaeesesaeeeessaeesssaeesessaeeseseeeesaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)......0.....eeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...0... ee eeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc cecececceeesseecceessseeeceesssseeecesssseeeeeeesaeeescessaeeeseessaaeessensaaeess D-1
END OR PET UIA: cess ces sane sas sxe sens anus wens sae sen ess news cexis eave onsa sue aks ais ew E-1
GLOSSARY... eeeceesseeceeseeeeesaceseeeeecesaeeeessaeecesaaeecssaeecesaeesssaeeeensaees F-1


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_30.jpeg:
Offensive BFM Errors

In offensive BFM, the most common mistakes have to do with fight
analysis. In analyzing the fight, the first thing to realize is the bandit’s
initial move can determine the type fight it is going to be. If the bandit’s
turn does not bring you through the 3/9 line, you should be able to remain
offensive, and classic offensive BFM applies. However, if the bandit can
get you ahead of the 3/9 line on the initial move, and you make no attempt
to control aspect, you will most likely overshoot and become defensive. In
this situation, many attackers start a quarter plane and zoom, trying to
save a flight path overshoot (thinking offensively), only to have the bandit
pull right to the attacker’s six. Although this maneuver may be successful
against a thrust-limited aircraft, when you try this against an aircraft
with similar capabilities, you will be surprised in a bad way. When you
attack a highly maneuverable aircraft that gets you ahead of the 3/9 line
on the initial move, do not give up all your energy and try to save a flight
path overshoot. Instead, initially fight a neutral fight and use your
energy advantage to regain the offensive.

Another common offensive mistake is power and airspeed control. Again,
the defender drives the fight. The bandits turn rate and radius determine
where you have to be if you want to kill. If you are turning to attack the
bandit from behind the 3/9 line, and the bandit is moving away from your
HUD, you are probably going too fast or not applying enough G. Pull the
throttles or stick back to stop the LOS movement on the canopy and
continue to readjust power and G to maintain the turn performance you
want.

Fight control, or lack of it, is also a common offensive BFM mistake.

Many times bandits who are out of airspeed and ideas are given a “new
lease on life” when the attacker performs a reposition maneuver that is
not necessary or too large. When you pull your nose off the bandit, you
are relaxing pressure and giving the bandit options. As a rule of thumb, if
you can keep the bandit within your canopy bow, the bandit will definitely
feel pressure and should remain predictable. Use pure pursuit only when
ready to employ ordnance, otherwise use lead and lag pursuit maneuvers
to control aspect, angle off and closure problems. These maneuvers should
be as small as possible to keep your nose on and pressuring, while
minimizing the bandit’s options. Using the same size reposition at

6000 feet when you are at 3000 feet will cause excessive angle off and ease
pressure on the bandit. As stated earlier, patience is important. Two
small repositions are better than one large one.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_31.jpeg:
Finally, once you are in the control position, seek to employ ordnance.
Remember the reason you do offensive BFM is to achieve a quick kill. In
the Strike Eagle, prolonged maneuvering in the BFM arena may lead to a
neutral or defensive situation or a one versus many engagement.

Scissors

A scissors is a series of rolls and reversals, caused by the bandit
attempting to reverse and force a slow speed fight. This will happen if you
are late to recognize a range or closure problem. The bandit will attempt
to accentuate the upcoming overshoot by pulling for your 6 o’clock. As you
react with your own roll and pull, a scissors develops (Figure D-17).

AAM-05-17

Figure D - 16. Scissors.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_32.jpeg:
Flat Scissors

A flat scissors is the result of an in-plane overshoot. The first priority is to
stop your forward velocity relative to the bandit. To do so, set the wings
relative to the horizon and pull up. Use idle power to slow forward
velocity initially, followed by max AB to maintain pitch attitude. When
the bandit starts to move forward on the canopy, pull to the bandit's high
6 o’clock to establish a 3/9 line advantage.

Lift vector control in the flat scissors is paramount. Overbanking causes a
loss of lift, which will cause your nose to drop, your ground velocity to
increase, and you will probably give up 3/9 advantage. Maintain a higher
relative nose position and the minimum lateral spacing to keep the bandit
out in front.

Once you have a 3/9-line advantage, use an early reversal (lead turn) at
the next pass to start reducing angle-off and slow the LOS. This in turn
will allow you a higher Pk gun opportunity. It is possible the bandit will
not allow you to slow the LOS sufficiently and force a low LOS snapshot.
You can attempt additional snapshots as long as the bandit decides to stay
in the fight. If the bandit attempts to leave, the bandit’s wings will
telegraph the maneuver. Seeing this, do your best lead turn in-plane and
predict the bandit’s flight path. Remember that a flat scissors is a slow
speed flying contest won by the aircraft more maneuverable at slow speed
and high AOA. If the outcome is in doubt, look for an opportunity to
separate before losing 3/9 advantage.

Major errors in a flat scissors are:

e Not pulling parallel to the horizon and thus increasing horizontal
travel.

e Not pulling toward the bandit’s six allowing too much lateral
separation to develop.

e Not controlling bank angle at slow speed and losing nose position.

e Not taking advantage of early reversal after gaining 3/9 advantage.

AAM-5 D - 26


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_33.jpeg:
Rolling Scissors

A rolling scissors (Figure D-18) generally occurs when the overshoot is in
the vertical (out-of-plane) or an altitude differential exists at the initiation
of a flat scissors. A lower wing-loaded adversary may also force you into a
rolling scissors as a defense.

In a rolling scissors, as your lift vector drops, your forward velocity vector
increases forcing you forward. The fighter on the bottom can accentuate
the forward “flush” by pulling the aircraft into the vertical and now the
roles are reversed. If neither of you transition to a flat scissors when on
top, these role reversals continue until one fighter out flies the other and
gains a sufficient energy advantage to roll toward the other fighter’s six.
In general, a rolling scissors will become a nose low spiral to the floor if
continued. In a continuous rolling scissors, the fighter with the better
maneuverability and ability to point the nose will win. Separating from a
rolling scissors is generally easier than from a flat scissors if done early
and properly. The best time to initiate the separation is during the roll
down while the bandit is pulling up. Errors in rolling scissors are the
same as a flat scissors except the aircraft must be overbanked to achieve
the roll.

@) O—~ @ ©) ()
eS SS
Oo © ©

©

AAM-05-18

Figure D - 17. Rolling Scissors.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_34.jpeg:
Separations

The primary goal of offensive BFM is to maneuver into weapons
parameters. Once you recognize you no longer have the potential to
achieve shot parameters, it is foolish to continue maneuvering against an
adversary. Your goal now is to attempt to separate prior to losing your
offensive position (Figure D-19). Do not wait until a defensive situation
develops before attempting a separation.

(2) = i0

OS

©) ©

AAM-05-19

Figure D - 18. Separation.

Once you have made the decision to separate, stop turning with the
bandit. Employ ordnance against the bandit to force a reaction while you
turn for separation. If you are unable to employ ordnance, do not close in
an obvious nonlethal position as this wastes energy that could be better
used for the subsequent separation. Once you recognize that you will not
have another shot opportunity, initiate your separation. Unload to
accelerate, but keep the aircraft banked to give the impression that you
are just sliding into deep lag. When at deep six and hopefully out of view,
roll and pull to establish max HCA (150-180°). Once there, unload again
and roll to reacquire the bandit. Be aware of the aircraft’s attitude and
altitude to avoid getting too nose low to avoid a floor kill. It is imperative
that you reacquire the bandit to assess your next move. With the tally,
continue small check turns to continue to increase HCA, being careful not
to over-g. As your speed increases, continue to maintain 8-10 units AOA.

AAM-5 D - 28


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_35.jpeg:
If the bandit reverses, you need to either break into the bandit or continue
to separate out of range, based on your assessment of the WEZ. Both
options necessitate chaff and flares.

Errors in separations include:

e Rolling and pulling too early thus telegraphing your intentions.

e Not pulling hard enough or long enough to establish maximum HCA.
e Not reacquiring the bandit.

e Not maintaining the unload.

e Hitting the ground.

e Breaking into the bandit after achieving a valid separation.

Short Range Radar Employment

Flying good BFM will put you into a WEZ. The AIM-120, AIM-9M and
the gun can all be launched without a radar lock. Fly BFM first and do
HOTAS second. However, for optimum weapons employment, you should
have a radar lock. Inability to achieve a lock on and employ weapons will
extend your BFM engagement, and will increase your vulnerability to
attack from an undetected bandit. The radar auto acquisition modes are
for short range, visual acquisition and lock on. For a complete discussion
of auto acquisition modes, refer to your Dash-34 and the RDR-3 workbook.
It is essential that you know the acquisition limits of each mode so that
you can rapidly determine which mode to select and achieve the lock.

Auto guns mode is a space-stabilized search, meaning that the radar
continues to search the selected volume of airspace as you maneuver. Due
to space stabilization, auto guns is frequently considered a nonvisual
acquisition mode. The advantages of auto guns are large search volume,
slewable search and ability to use the radar for clearing beyond the
immediate fight. It is important to be very precise when slewing your
coverage, especially in altitude. The disadvantages are that the MPRF
wave form used for auto guns does not allow a lock on inside of 3000 feet
and you must reference the radar scope to determine actual altitude
coverage.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_36.jpeg:
Long range boresight, boresight, super search and vertical scan modes are
all heading stabilized, meaning that the airspace searched moves as you
maneuver your aircraft. Each of the modes take priority over auto guns
search. The radar uses a short pulse MPRF waveform to lock on at ranges
as close as 500 feet. Long range boresight is not usually used in the visual
merge arena.

Boresight mode is the most discriminating of the auto acquisition modes
because of the small amount of airspace searched (4° around radar
boreline). Radar discrimination is a big advantage in a multi-aircraft
fight but the disadvantage is that the volume of airspace searched is
small. Because the radar searches around the radar boreline, using this
technique requires pure pursuit geometry until the radar locks on.
Boresight is the most reliable and rapid acquisition mode.

Vertical scan acquisition mode uses a very narrow azimuth search from
+5° to +55° in elevation. The advantage of vertical scan is the search
volume is along the lift vector. The disadvantage is that your lift vector
must be on the bandit during maneuvers and at times this is not
appropriate. The primary problem with using this mode comes from not
recognizing the difference between plane of motion and plane of
symmetry. The planes are aligned only when bank angle is zero, or in
pure vertical maneuvering. Lock on problems occur when the pilot
positions the lift vector on the target (aligns planes of motion) and the
vertical scan search volume (along plane of symmetry) misses the bandit.
An additional BFM error often occurs as the pilot spends too much time
near the bandit’s plane of motion while attempting the lock on, thus
denying or losing turning room. A second positioning error concerns
pulling the bandit through the HUD and below the +5° coverage of
vertical scan. Remember, once the target is at or below the waterline, it is
below vertical scan coverage.

AAM-5 D - 30


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_37.jpeg:
The supersearch acquisition mode offers the advantages of a heading
stabilized search with a relatively large search volume (slewable
supersearch). The disadvantages of supersearch are that the target must
remain relatively stable in the search volume for lock on to occur and that
there is a blind zone from +6° to +18°. The canopy reference is from near
the top of the HUD to just below the canopy bow. The supersearch up
HUD display is somewhat misleading because it depicts coverage where
no coverage exists.

Generally, the pilot will select auto guns before attempting another auto
acquisition mode. This allows the radar to search beyond the immediate
fight while you maneuver and take command of the radar, enabling the
other auto acquisition modes. Selection of auto guns also prevents entry
to TWS modes if a lock on is undetected and the auto acquisition switch is
moved forward or aft. After lock on, selection of MRM from SRM or guns
forces the radar to attempt immediate HPRF upgrade, possibly saving a
minimum range AIM-7 shot opportunity.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_38.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The angle measured between the target’s tail and the attacker is

a. aspect angle.
b. HCA.
c. angle off.
d. angle of attack.
2. When your nose is on the bandit, you arein ___ pursuit.
a. lead
b. pure
ce. lag
d. hot

3. The adversary’s projected turn radius is called

a. the attack plane.
b. turning room.
c. the plane of motion.
d. the turn circle.
4. The is primarily designed to control excess overtake.
a. lag reposition
b. lead reposition
c. acceleration maneuver
d. hard turn

AAM-5 D - 32


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_39.jpeg:
Which of the following is not a major error in the flat scissors?

a. Not pulling parallel to the horizon and thus increasing
horizontal travel

b. Not pulling toward the bandit’s six, allowing too much lateral
separation to develop

c. Not controlling bank angle at slow speed and losing nose
position

d. Pulling to the bandit’s six

During short range BFM, if the defender’s turn radius is equal to
yours, going for a quick gunshot

is the optimum solution.

should only be accomplished after a quarter plane.

will result in an overshoot if turn circles are not aligned.
will prevent the defender from separating.

pe op


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the basic positional geometry associated with BFM to
include aspect angle, angle off and turn radius/circle.

2. Identify the three basic pursuit curves.

3. Identify selected offensive BFM maneuvers, their purpose and when
they should be employed.

AAM-5 B-1


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_40.jpeg:
l. a
2. b
3. d
4, a
5. d
6. Cc

AAM-5

ANSWERS


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_41.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-5


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_42.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The angle measured between the longitudinal axis of the attacker
and that of bandit is the

a. aspect angle.

b. angle off.

c. angle of attack.

d. angle of incidence.

When your nose is behind the bandit you are in ____ pursuit.

a. pure

b. lead

ce. lag

d. hot

The is a last ditch maneuver to preserve nose/tail separation.
a. lag reposition

b. lead reposition

c. quarter plane

d.  lagroll

The is primarily designed to increase closure through lead

pursuit and cutoff acceleration.

lag reposition

lead reposition
acceleration maneuver
hard turn

ao op

In offensive BFM the most common mistakes have to do with

a. fight analysis and control (not driving the fight and not keeping
pressure on the bandit).
. the F-15E being inferior to almost all fighters.
c. using BFM.
d. being there in the first place!


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_43.jpeg:
6. Which is not a common mistake in long range BFM?

a. Insufficient lateral turning room due to excessive pure pursuit
while outside the bandit’s turn circle, resulting in an overshoot
and, possibly, a reversal.

b. Too much lateral offset or lag pursuit, resulting in releasing
pressure on the bandit, allowing the bandit to increase range by
extending away, or using the turning room to make the fight
neutral.

c. Too much vertical turning room too early (while outside the
defender’s turn circle) which again releases pressure on the
bandit and allows the bandit to use it to improve the situation.

d. ‘Flying into the turn circle to reach an offset point from the
bandit’s path from which a max turn can be made to a slight
flight path overshoot, about one radius behind the defender.

7. Once you realize you no longer have the potential to achieve shot
parameters you should

a. wait until the bandit makes a mistake.
b. continue BFM.

c. separate.

d.

transfer to the Army and go to helicopter school.

8.  Ifan excessive amount of lag or a bandit acceleration while your nose
is off results in becoming stagnated or stuck in lag, reestablish
closure with a/an

lag reposition.

lead reposition maneuver.
lag roll.

Immelman turn.

ao oP

9. From a 9000 foot perch, what pursuit curve would you initially follow
when attacking a max performing bandit with similar turn and
power capabilities?

a. Lead
b. Lag
c. Pure

AAM-5 E-2


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_44.jpeg:
AOA

BFM

HCA

HPRF

LOS

MPRF

MRM

Pk

SRM

WEZ

GLOSSARY

Angle of attack

Basic fighter maneuvers

Heading crossing angle

High pulse repetition frequency
Line of sight

Medium pulse repetition frequency
Medium range missile

Probability of kill

Short range missile

Weapon employment zone

AAM-5


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_45.jpeg:
AAM-5

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
end of text quiz.

2. Read the BFM sections of AFTTP 3-1, Vol XVII and AFTTP 3-3, Vol
XVII, Chapter 4.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-5

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

In every conflict since WWI, aircraft have been used to destroy other
aircraft. Although aircraft, weapons and arenas have changed, basic
concepts and basic maneuvering have remained the same. With this in
mind, this workbook covers those basic fighter maneuvers (BFM) that
currently apply to the F-15E and the threats we face.

The purpose of air-to-air combat is to destroy the enemy and survive. To
accomplish this task, you may be required to employ BFM. Basic fighter
maneuvers are not exact maneuvers flown to a specific conclusion, but
combinations of maneuvers blended together. How you combine these
maneuvers depends on your continual assessment of the situation. First,
force a reaction from the bandit, predict where the bandit is going and
then maneuver to achieve weapons parameters. You must constantly
reassess the effectiveness of your maneuvers and the reactions of the
bandit. By maintaining a continual process of force, predict and
maneuver, you will achieve the kill or a tactical separation.

Basic fighter maneuvers are a blend of rolls, turns and accelerations to
gain an energy or a positional advantage, or both, over an airborne
adversary. You should remember that the primary purpose of these
maneuvers is to place your aircraft within weapons parameters (offensive)
to kill the bandit or to deny an adversary entry into weapons parameters
(defensive) to survive.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_8.jpeg:
BFM MECHANICS AND DEFINITIONS

BFM is the application of aircraft handling skills to solve the problems of

range, closure,

aspect and angle off in relation to another aircraft. The

three BFM tools are roll, turn and acceleration.

Roll

Turn

Acceleration

AAM-5

Roll allows you to position your lift vector and determine
the plane of motion (POM) in which you turn. Roll also
aids you in keeping sight of the bandit.

A turn allows you to attain weapons employment zones or
defeat your bandit’s attack/weapons. As your instructor
will show you, optimum or max turns can be defined by
aircraft angle of attack.

Energy is an important commodity during air-to-air
maneuvering. Your aircraft will not always do everything
you want it to and maintain a high-energy state. Thus,
you will often need to regain energy. The quickest way to
do this is through a well-executed acceleration. The F-15E
generally does its best acceleration at 8-10 units AOA.

Although getting energy back is your main goal, keep these
in mind:

e Be cognizant of your attitude (do not try to
accelerate going up), altitude (if you hit the ground
you have finished the enemy's job) and airspeed (do
not spend valuable time out of the fight accelerating
if you do not really need the extra airspeed). During
BF, there is a constant trade off between energy
and nose position.

e Be aware of your nose position. Acceleration
maneuvers often result in a nose low attitude.
Allowing your nose to get buried forces you to give
up your newly gained energy to get back in the fight.


Text from AAM-5_OBFM_page_9.jpeg:
BFM and Aircraft Feel

Successful energy management is often the key element in determining
the outcome of a maneuvering fight. The challenge of energy
management is knowing your aircraft’s envelope and developing a
“heads-up” feel for aircraft performance and energy state. AOA control is
essential in performing each of the basic maneuvers. Figure D-1
illustrates some key numbers that provide a reference for “max
performing” the Strike Eagle.

FUEL/STORE ASYMMETRY
LIMIT

AILERON GYROSCOPE
WASHOUT _/] EFFECT
RUDDER
MIN WASHOUT
DRAG
OPTIMUM
TURN c L MAX

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44
COCKPIT ANGLE OF ATTACK (AOA) UNITS

AAM-05-01

Figure D - 1. BFM AOA Guide.

Geometry

In order to execute successful BFM, a pilot must understand the geometric
relationship to the target and how it affects weapon employment
capability. The spatial relationship of two aircraft can be analyzed from
three perspectives: positional geometry, attack geometry and the weapons
envelope.



