Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING
AAM-9
AIR COMBAT MANEUVERING (ACM)

MAY 2000

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_10.jpeg:
Deconfliction

The most important concept when discussing roles/responsibilities is that
of deconfliction. The support fighter owns the deconfliction hammer at all
times until a proper role exchange occurs. Realize the bandit determines
who the engaged fighter should be and may necessitate the need for a role
swap. The control zone is an inherently dangerous region since offensive
BFM drives attacking fighters into this small airspace. Therefore, it is
imperative that support fighters ensure the engaged fighter is not a factor
before entering the control zone. As the support fighter, you should avoid
all actions that will hamper the engaged fighter’s ability to fulfill the
primary responsibility of killing the bandit. This does not preclude the
support fighter from employing all-aspect weapons against the bandit as
soon as shot deconfliction (discussed later) requirements have been met.

Role Establishment

Engaged

By default, the flight lead is the engaged fighter until clearing the
wingman to engage. The most effective elements are those in which there
is a fairly fluid exchange of roles in response to the bandit’s maneuvering
decisions. Roles are established by an “KNGAGED?” call by one fighter or
the other. The hierarchy to determine who should be calling “ENGAGED”
is most defensive fighter, most offensive fighter, then flight lead. The
initial “ENGAGED?” call requires a response from the other aircraft for the
role establishment to occur. The best way to respond would be

“EAGLE 2,” which would imply that you were tally the bandit and picking
up the support fighter role. Some flight leads may want to hear

“EAGLE 2, TALLY” as a response. As the engaged fighter, you are either
defensive or offensive as discussed in the following paragraphs.

Defensive

The defensive role is whom the bandit is actively attacking. This can
begin in the BVR or visual arena. Ifa fighter is reacting defensively, that
fighter should be the engaged fighter. If a role swap is required, it will not
be accomplished until a positive handoff through radio communications is
achieved. For example, “EAGLE 1, DEFENSIVE, BANDIT MY SIX, 6000
FT,” would require a response of “EAGLE 2” to establish roles. In general,
“DEFENSIVE” is equivalent to an “ENGAGED?” call, which sets up the
proper engaged/support fighter roles.

AAM-9 D-4


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_11.jpeg:
Offensive

If the bandit is unaware, then the fighter with the most offensive entry
should call “ENGAGED.” If the bandit is reacting to a fighter, then that
fighter should call “ENGAGED.” For example, “EAGLE 1, TALLY 1, BRA
020/55, 5000, ENGAGED.” As a wingman, you should always strive to be
the engaged fighter; it is your chance to be aggressive. The flight lead will
reign you in if required.

Flight Lead

If everything previously discussed is equal and no one has yet called
“ENGAGED,” then the flight lead is engaged. Once the bandit reacts, it
should become clear who should subsequently call “ENGAGED” in
relation to the above-mentioned criteria.

Support

Any fighter who is not an engaged fighter automatically assumes a
support role. A support fighter maintains this role until it is absolutely
clear to all involved fighters via communication that the support fighter
has incurred the engaged role, including by going defensive.

Role Exchange
Once roles have been established, they do not switch without confirmation
from the engaged fighter. There must be a simple rule that applies to all

situations to determine when the roles need to swap.

Engaged Fighter is Offensive/Neutral

It is important to remember that the support fighter does not need to be
the engaged fighter to employ ordnance, as long as the flight path and
weapons deconfliction can be maintained. If the engaged fighter is
neutral/stagnated in an offensive position and the support fighter has a
better entry into the control zone, then the support fighter should call
“ENGAGED” to request the role exchange. The support fighter will
maintain deconfliction until the role swap has occurred through
communication. The support fighter should call “ENGAGED” prior to
maneuvering the jet into a position where a potential flight path conflict
might exist. In addition, the support fighter should not call “ENGAGED”
too early, thereby reducing pressure on the bandit. The timing of the
“ENGAGED” call is critical.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_12.jpeg:
Support Fighter Becomes Defensive

The roles should swap when the support fighter becomes defensive and
can no longer perform support fighter responsibilities. This will require
communication for the swap to be complete. It should be noted, however,
that the roles do not have to swap as long as the support fighter can
maintain the support fighter’s responsibilities. For example, if Eagle 1 is
out of the fight looking for a reentry and the bandit’s nose passes through
Eagle 1 (the support fighter), but the bandit does not continue to
prosecute an attack on Eagle 1, then Eagle 1 would not call “ENGAGED.”
The most efficient ACM occurs when there is harmony between who the
bandit has chosen to engage and the roles established through F-15E
communication.

Engaged Communication

Once a fighter calls “ENGAGED” according to the criteria, the following
comm terms will be among the possible responses available to both
aircrews:

e PRESS — A directive call to the flight member who just called
“ENGAGED” to continue the attack. The individual saying
the word “PRESS” is now accepting the support role and will
ensure deconfliction. Roles are swapped.

e UNABLE -— This response indicates the engaged fighter is
unable to disengage/pick up the support role without
jeopardizing continued survival, or the need to attack an
additional bandit entering the fight will not allow the
engaged fighter to pick up the support role. Roles are not

swapped.

The flight lead has an additional response available:

e NEGATIVE - This simply means “no.” The flight lead, based
on inherent authority, is unwilling to disengage/flow in the
manner requested. The wingman must maintain the support
role. Roles are not swapped.

AAM-9 D-6


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_13.jpeg:
Flow, Roles Exchanged

Once the engaged fighter responds in the affirmative (i.e., “PRESS”) to a
role exchange request, the roles are exchanged. However, even if the
“PRESS” call is received, prudence dictates that the newly engaged fighter
should exercise caution as the support fighter (or any other involved
aircraft) deconflicts. The engaged fighter must continue to clear its own
flight path and remain predictable.

Flow, No Exchange of Roles

If the engaged fighter is blind or unable to exit the fight without being
shot, the engaged fighter should call “UNABLE.” If the engaged fighter
has denied a role exchange, the support fighter must flow to deconflict
with the fight and continue in the support role. However, this does not
preclude the support fighter from shooting if a clear field of fire becomes
available (and flight path deconfliction is assured). The only way for a
wingman to deny a role exchange is through an “UNABLE” call. The
flight lead may use “NEGATIVE” for several reasons. For example, if the
support fighter is not in a good position when calling “ENGAGED.”

Special Case Engage/Support Communication
Break Turns

A great deal of confusion can occur when a bandit arrives in a position
that forces the element to execute a break turn. If a break turn is called,
the F-15E on the inside of the turn will be the engaged fighter until it
becomes obvious (bandit’s pursuit course or F-15E RWR) who the bandit is
attacking. The fighter on the outside of the turn will have the easiest
time maintaining flight path deconfliction while still executing smart
BFM. Whoever called the break turn should be talking the other fighter’s
eyes onto the bandit until “TALLY” is called.

Bandit Switches

The bandit could elect to switch the attack to another F-15E at anytime.
The primary indicators of a switch are bandit nose position (consider
bandit radar/heat nose and HMS capabilities, as applicable) and F-15E
spike status. The first fighter to realize the switch should use directive
communication as required to initiate the appropriate defensive response
and add any necessary descriptive commentary. The responses are as
described earlier. For example, “EAGLE 4, BANDIT SWITCHED,
ENGAGED.” As a technique, the flight lead may brief that a “BANDIT
SWITCHED” call with an acknowledgement from the other fighter
completes a role exchange. This technique helps to minimize
communication.

D-7 AAM-9


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_14.jpeg:
ACM COMMUNICATIONS

Effective communication is essential to maximize the element’s potential.
A key factor in role establishment and coordinated employment is
communication of critical information during the engagement. This is
where the roles and responsibilities are confirmed so there is no doubt as
to who the engaged fighter is and who the support fighter is. Aircrews
must use standard terminology in order to avoid confusion, enhance SA
and minimize excessive radio transmission time. Standard transmissions
using brevity code result in a lot of information passed in relatively few
words. On the other hand, if standard terminology does not fit the
situation, clearly and concisely state what needs to be said. Nonstandard
radio terminology (RT), lack of call signs and excessive communication can
cause confusion and misunderstanding at a critical time. Communication
discipline is necessary. No one else on the tactical frequency needs to hear
this intraflight communication; the intensity of the communication
required may totally saturate whatever frequency is being used.
Therefore, use the auxiliary radio to the maximum extent possible for
ACM communication.

Format

The format depends on whether the element is starting out offensive or
defensive. There are four categories of communication words that apply to
ACM: directive, descriptive, informative and engaged/support
communication. This discussion is presented in terms of an engaged
element. However, it applies with any number of involved F-15Ks.

AAM-9 D-8


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_15.jpeg:
Communication Categories

Directive Commentary

Directive commentary tells the other fighter in the element to do
something. The first priority is to get the element maneuvering in
minimum time to defeat any potential bandit attack and establish roles.
Tell the element what to do by using the call sign of the fighter you are
talking to and then filling in important additional information with
descriptive commentary. For example, if the F-15E wingman (Eagle 2)
visually detects a bandit approaching weapons parameters from the flight
lead’s right side, the call “EAGLE 1, BREAK RIGHT!” should be made.
Eagle 1 now has the engaged role (the defensive fighter), while Eagle 2 is
the support fighter. Eagle 2, currently with the highest SA on the bandit,
attempts to kill the bandit while deconflicting with Eagle 1, who may be
blind and no joy during the defensive break. Examples of directive calls
are:

@ BREAK (with direction)  ) CHECK
e HARD (with direction) ® COME BACK
e FLARE e COME OFF

@ SEPARATE (with direction) e CONTINUE

e JINK e DEPLOY

e BLOW THROUGH e HOOK

e BRACKET @ PUSH IT UP

e BUGOUT ® REFERENCE (with
direction)

An important point to remember is that when a wingman uses a directive
term/word, it is a request and the flight lead reserves the right to
approve/deny the wingman’s requested action. When the flight lead uses
a directive term, it is just that—lead has the hammer!


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_16.jpeg:
Descriptive Commentary

Descriptive commentary consists of telling the other fighters where to look
or what is happening. Descriptive calls can also be used to ask questions.
After initiating a reaction with directive communication, fill in with
descriptive commentary, as required, to coordinate between involved
fighters. Descriptive commentary should include call sign and one or
more of the following items as the situation requires:

e Type of aircraft or threat identification (bandit/bogey)
e Left or right (side of aircraft)

e Clock position

e High/level/low

e Range

For example, “EAGLE 1, BANDIT RIGHT 3 O’CLOCK, 2 MILES, LOW.”
Other example descriptive terms include:

e BANDIT e NO JOY

e BLIND e OFF

e BOGEY e POSIT

e BUDDY LOCK e RAYGUN

e FOX e SLOW

e GREEN e STATUS

e KILL e SWITCHED
e LOCKED e TALLY

e LOW e TRASHED
e MERGED e VISUAL

AAM-9 D-10


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_17.jpeg:
Informative/Situational Awareness Building Communication

Informative communication is used to build situational awareness.

Examples include:

OFFENSIVE/DEFENSIVE

ANCHORED

IN

OUT

SWITCHED

SPIKE

SPLIT

CHECK GAS

Informative calls use the call sign of the aircraft talking.

Plain English

While communication discipline is of the utmost importance in the air
combat arena, killing the bandit in minimum time while ensuring F-15E
deconfliction is paramount. If at a loss for what to say, revert to plain

English to convey intentions to the other fighter.

Engaged Communication Format

When engaging from a radar contact or during longer-range tally-ho’s use

BRA format. For example, “EAGLE 1, TALLY 1, BRA 020/5, 5000,

ENGAGED.” When closer, communication may degrade to clock position
and relative altitude such as “EAGLE 1, TALLY 1, RIGHT 1 O'CLOCK,
LOW, ENGAGED.”

AAM-9


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_18.jpeg:
Merge Communication

At the merge, there are four brevity terms to indicate the flight’s status:

ANCHORED - Call “ANCHORED?” if anticipating turning
more than 90° to shoot a bandit.

DEFENSIVE — A bandit is forcing the aircraft to react for
survival. The defensive fighter should be the engaged
fighter, thus not responsible for deconfliction. It implies soon
to be anchored.

ENGAGED — The caller is maneuvering with intent to kill
the bandit. In addition, using this term begins the process of
establishing ACM roles.

BREAK - This call is a directive to perform an immediate
maximum performance turn in the indicated direction. It
assumes a defensive situation.

Brevity Definitions

AAM-9

OUT (with direction) — Informative call indicating a turn to a
cold aspect relative to the threat. In the ACM environment,
this call is optional. The support fighter normally uses this
call after a role exchange when leaving the fight to regain
energy.

IN (with direction) — Informative call indicating a turn to a
hot aspect relative to the threat. In the ACM environment,
this call is optional. The support fighter normally uses it
after regaining energy and starting the turn back toward the
fight.

STATUS — Request for an individual’s tactical situation. In
the ACM environment, this call is used to confirm which
aircraft is the bandit. A quick way to establish
bandit/friendly is to call out what is seen. For example,
“EAGLE 1, STATUS, HIGH/LOW.” The description should
be concise and discriminating. If Eagle 1 were above the
bandit, the expected reply would be “EAGLE 1, HIGH.”
Other discriminators might be offensive/defensive, left
turn/right turn, nose high/nose low, north/south,
pushing/pulling, etc.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_19.jpeg:
SEPARATE -— Leaving a specific engagement; may or may
not reenter.

BUGOUT - Separation from that particular engagement/
attack/operation with no intent to reengage/return.

BLIND — No visual contact with friendly aircraft; opposite of
VISUAL.

BLOW THROUGH - Directive/informative call that indicates
aircraft will continue straight ahead at the merge and not
turn with target.

BREAK (with direction) — Directive to perform an immediate
maximum performance turn in the indicated direction. This
call assumes a defensive situation.

DEFENSIVE -— Aircraft is in a defensive position and is
maneuvering with respect to A/A threat. In establishing
ACM roles, the aircraft calling “DEFENSIVE” initially
assumes the engaged role.

ENGAGED — Maneuvering with the intent of achieving a
kill. The term is also used to initiate the establishment of
ACM roles.

FOX — Air-to-air weapons employment.
HARD (with direction) — High G energy sustaining turn.

MERGE(D) — Information that friendlies and targets have
arrived in the same visual arena. This call indicates radar
returns have come together.

NEGATIVE -— Simply means no, requested action is denied
(reserved for flight lead).

NO JOY — Aircrew does not have visual contact with the
target/bandit; opposite of TALLY.

POSIT — Request for position; response normally in terms of
clock position, cardinal direction, geographic landmark or off
a common reference point.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB NC
27531.

Supersedes: AAM-9, July 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_20.jpeg:
e SWITCH or SWITCHED - Indicates attacking bandit is
changing from one aircraft to another.

e TALLY — Sighting of a target, bandit or enemy position;
opposite of NO JOY.

e TUMBLEWEED -— Indicates limited situational awareness;
no tally, no visual; a request for information.

e VISUAL - Sighting of a friendly aircraft or ground position;
opposite of BLIND.

Any other communication terms that are different from AFTTP 3-1 should
be briefed by the flight lead.

Basic Rules for Good Flight Communication

Do not waste words. Know and use the standard brevity code from
AFTTP 3-1.

Always be directive, pause with the microphone unkeyed (to listen),
observe the directive action being performed, then be descriptive. When
needed, repeat the directive call. Even in a permissive communications
environment, a couple of seconds may mean the difference between
survival and a long walk home.

Speak slowly and distinctly. If you are not understood, you are not
contributing to flight situational awareness. Consider limitations of

secure and Have Quick radios.

Listen! Communication is two-way and requires you to listen on the
radio. This also means to keep intercockpit communication to a minimum.

AAM-9 D-14


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_21.jpeg:
WEAPONS DECONFLICTION

Once the roles are established by use of good ACM communication, the
next step usually involves the employment of ordnance. Under normal
circumstances, the engaged fighter is either pressuring the bandit
offensively or in a defensive situation near the bandit. From these
positions, shot deconfliction is not normally a concern for the engaged
fighter. However, one of the support fighter’s primary concerns should be
shot deconfliction to avoid fratricide.

AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17 has specific doctrine for shot deconfliction but the
flight lead may use simplified rules of thumb. These should be briefed and
understood thoroughly. The support fighter is capable and allowed to
employ ordnance from various positions in relation to the fight. Because
of this, the support fighter needs to pay special attention to the rules for
shot deconfliction and use the appropriate weapon for the situation
presented. It is critical that you are able to employ ordnance within these
rules, since fratricide is obviously unacceptable in all circumstances.

Refer to AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17 for information on the AIM-7, AIM-9 and
AIM-120 shot deconfliction criteria. Only the gun will be addressed here.

For a variety of reasons, the gun may be the only weapon available. The
biggest advantage of using the gun is that it is very discriminating when
used properly and can produce a clean, surgical kill. It is also all-aspect
with a minimum range driven only by the desire of the F-15E aircrew to
avoid collision with bandit debris. The disadvantage is the high level of
concentration required to be effective. In addition, slowing down to use
the gun in a multibogey environment is not conducive to long-term
survival.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_22.jpeg:
OFFENSIVE ACM

Offensive ACM emphasizes working as a two-ship to kill the threat. Once
again, the key to successful employment of the two-ship depends on your
ability to work with your lead and fulfill the element contracts of engaged
and support fighters. Key ingredients of this phase include formations,
radar search patterns, intercept procedures as a two-ship, weapons
employment, merge/postmerge tactics, good BFM skills and intraflight
communication.

Formations and radar search patterns depend on the individual flight
lead’s desires. Intercepts are primarily single-side offsets (lower aspect
targets) and brackets (high aspect targets). Weapons employment
depends on the rules of engagement (VID versus BVR).

Normally, an offensive ACM objective is to turn at the merge and kill the
bandit in minimum time using a fluid attack system. By the merge,
someone should be designated as the engaged fighter and someone should
be the support fighter. If engaged, your primary goal should be weapons
employment and killing the bandit or at least keeping the bandit
predictable. As the support fighter, maneuver as required to support the
engaged fighter. The best support you can give is to kill the bandit so the
flight does not get anchored!

2 v 1 Intercepts

Approaching the merge, the element must determine what ACM actions
are needed. Gaining the tally, determining how many bandits are alive,
deciding on the appropriate tactic, identifying friend or foe and merging
with an advantage are all important parts of the ACM problem at the
merge.

The two most common scenarios that will cause 2 v 1 merges are a
remaining bandit after BVR shots or a VID requirement of a bogey in your
AOR. It is assumed for the purposes of training that the element can
recognize a remaining bandit and employ premerge to kill. The VID
situation is a different problem altogether.

Basic intercept tactics remain the same with single-side offset and bracket

being the primary options. For the purposes of ACM, the intercept
discussion is joined at the VID decision.

AAM-9 D-16


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_23.jpeg:
Single-Side Offset (SSO)

With an unaware or low aspect bogey (< 15 AA), the VID scenario from a
SSO is simply a stern conversion as an element. However, the wingman
must gain enough separation from lead at the merge to be able to employ
ordnance once the bogey is declared a bandit. This is accomplished by
deploying to a wider formation and gaining an altitude stack. The flight
lead flies the normal pursuit geometry and goes pure NLT 10 nm. The
wingman should use the bogey’s altitude to determine whether to stack
high or low. Coming from the opposite portion of the sky as lead will help
deny tally two.

Gaining a split of approximately 3-4 nm will help the wingman keep
visual while ensuring the bogey cannot minimum range any WEZs if it
turns into the wingman at the merge. When taking this turning room, the
wingman must avoid gimballing the contact while trying to get the desired
split, striving to be pure NLT 7 nm.

Both members of the element need to work for the tally (always assuming
more than one). The wingman needs to keep both tally and visual to avoid
shot deconfliction problems postmerge.

As lead approaches the merge, the wingman should be assessing available
shots and selecting the appropriate weapon for the situation. Expect to
hear “EAGLE 1, ENGAGED, BOGEY” at some point. The best answer for
the support fighter is “EAGLE 2, TALLY,” thereby establishing roles.
After visually identifying the bogey, lead will say “EAGLE 1, MERGED,
HOSTILE, HOSTILE” and with shot deconfliction requirements met, the
wingman should employ ordnance to kill.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_24.jpeg:
If the wingman has sufficient separation and altitude split, entry into the
fight should be simple regardless of the bandit’s first move. If the bandit
turns belly up to engage lead, the wingman flies BFM to maneuver to a
shot(s) and kills before the following merge. If the bandit turns into the
wingman and is unaware, the wingman should use a front aspect weapon
and follow up with BFM using the established vertical turning room. In
either case shown in Figure D-1, if the wingman is unable to employ
ordnance or gain a kill, the wingman is expected to BFM the bandit and
call “EAGLE 2, ENGAGED?” if necessary.

"EAGLE 2, KILL HOSTILE,
\ \ SEPARATE EAST"

"EAGLE 1, ENGAGED,
BOGEY, 11 O'CLOCK, 12 MILES"
— f "EAGLE 1, MERGED, HOSTILE, HOSTILE"

~N a

"EAGLE 2, TALLY"
NL { "EAGLE 2, FOX 2"
_7f

Figure D - 1. Single-Side Offset.

AAM-09-01


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_25.jpeg:
Bracket

In the case of the aware or high aspect bogey (= 16 AA), the flight lead can
choose to bracket the bogey NLT 15 nm. Whether from a SSO or flying
directly at the bogey, the wingman may need to maneuver away from the
bogey’s nose and stack opposite of lead to help the bracket. Forcing the
bogey to look in two different areas will help to deny tally two. The
primary goal of the bracket is to force the bogey to commit on one of the
fighters.

The bracket is a visual formation flown to approximately 4-5 nm wide and
usually bracketing the bogey in altitude, although this may not always be
possible. The radio call should be “EAGLE 1, BRACKET, BOGEY, BRA
030/20, 15,000.” Again, the wingman should take care not to gimbal when
maneuvering and be pure as soon as the geometry will allow.
Determining who the bogey is committed on can be done with the tally or
with the radar and the bogey’s aspect. For this example, the wingman
will recognize the bogey’s aspect decreasing and should communicate
“EAGLE 1, BOGEY’S HOT ON YOU.” At this point, the wingman should
go pure and, in effect, lead turn the bogey to enter the merge in a position
of advantage.

Approaching the merge, lead should call “EAGLE 1, ENGAGED” and the
wingman can best acknowledge with an “EAGLE 2, TALLY” call. At the
merge (Figure D-2), the wingman has similar choices for shots and
engaging the bogey once lead declares “EAGLE 1, MERGED, HOSTILE,
HOSTILE.” Again, shot deconfliction and flying BFM to kill the bandit
are the keys to success.

"EAGLE 1, BRACKET "

"EAGLE 1, ENGAGED,
BOGEY, 11 O'CLOCK, 12 MILES"

a =
—_
"EAGLE 2, TALLY" "\
— jf “EAGLE 2, KILL HOSTILE, SEPARATE EAST"
_” "EAGLE 2, FOX 2"
"EAGLE 1, BOGEY'S
HOT ON YOU" AAM-09-02

Figure D - 2. Bracket.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_26.jpeg:
Separation

From either scenario, assuming lead is responsible for the VID and the
wingman for affecting a quick kill, the next step is for the element to
separate from the fireball. This is where the support fighter’s SA is
needed to help the flight escape. The engaged fighter is usually slow after
flying BFM to kill the bandit, so initially the engaged fighter will want to
separate straight ahead. The support fighter can help by directing a new
heading based on where safe airspace is and where both fighters can
regain mutual support. The bottom line is someone needs to get on the
radio and initiate the separation with a heading. The flight lead will
probably have to refine the heading to expedite the rejoin to tactical
formation once out of the immediate area.

The first goal of the separation is to leave the area of the fireball, which
may attract attention. Proper mechanics for the separation are critical for
both fighters. Best acceleration, visual lookout and spike inventory are
important to getting out of the immediate area. Once the initial
maneuvering has begun, the element can use check turns to get back to
tactical formation and increase mutual support.

An important part of mutual support is visual lookout, so be careful not to
get buried in the jet and forget to check six. This is one benefit of a
two-seat aircraft. The WSO can focus on checking six and gaining/keeping
the visual. The pilot, on the other hand, should focus on short-range radar
work.

Short-range radar work starts with AUTO GUNS in the direction of the
separation or any turns during the separation. First, each pilot should
clear the area off the nose for immediate threats. Do not forget to visually
search for other bandits out of the radar’s coverage. Once the AUTO
GUNS search has cleared that area, each pilot should bias the coverage to
the briefed search area. Remember to accurately place the acquisition
symbols whenever slewing to avoid burying the search in the dirt or
looking up into space. After 10-15 seconds of search, the pilot should
select short-range missile (SRM) to expand coverage and search area to
20 nm. Once this area is clear, the pilot can select medium range missile
and initiate a radar/visual handoff, as briefed, to the WSO.

Whether separating from an alive threat or bugging out after a kill, the
mechanics of the separation, the regaining of mutual support, the
short-range radar game plan and the visual lookout for bandits are all
important steps to successfully escaping a merge/engagement with a
bandit.

AAM-9 D - 20


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_27.jpeg:
Postmerge Maneuvering

A number of maneuver options exist after a merge based on the results of
the merge and the actions of the bandit. If the bandit remains unaware
until after the merge, stern entry maneuvering will be required. Stern
entries may include the support fighter exiting the fight and maneuvering
for areentry. Initially, these reentries will be practiced from perch setups
as described in the Air-to-Air Phase Manual.

If the bandit becomes aware of at least one of the fighters prior to the
merge, high aspect maneuvering will be required. These situations will
usually involve one fighter anchored in a HABFM fight and the other
maneuvering for a reentry or weapons separation to employ ordnance.
These situations are initially presented in the first 180° of turn during the
intercepts. These more dynamic situations will be started from butterfly
OACM setups. For any of the above situations, it is important for the
support fighter to understand the mechanics of how to reenter the fight,
although it should be emphasized that a complete reentry may not always
be required. The primary goal should be to kill the bandit.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_28.jpeg:
Reentering the Fight as the Support Fighter

Support Fighter Position

The support fighter’s position must allow for fulfilling the responsibilities
as previously listed. In addition, the support fighter must be able to
assume the engaged fighter responsibilities if the situation dictates. In
relation to the fight, the support fighter should strive to stay 2-5 nm away.
This range window keeps the support fighter far enough away to deny the
bandit a shot opportunity, but close enough to keep tally and visual.
Extending further than 5 nm makes the fight difficult to see and it will
take too long to reenter the fight. Your goal is to only go far enough to
gain turning room and find an entry to a WEZ (which may be all-aspect
ordnance from well outside the fight). Also, your flight path should keep
the fight between 7 o’clock and 10 o’clock or 5 o’clock and 2 o’clock. Do not
allow the fight to drift to 6 o’clock; if you do, you may quickly extend
beyond visual range. Pointing directly at the fight is only good for
ordnance employment or entry into the fight. The support fighter’s flight
path should be a series of hard turns and extensions outside the fight.
Airspeed should be approximately 425-450 KCAS (near corner velocity)
with power as necessary to maintain energy (4-6 Gs). The extensions
should be 5-10 seconds maximum, allowing energy to be gained/
maintained while turning in an unpredictable manner. By stacking no
closer than 2000 feet vertically to the fight, the support fighter can
preclude bandit tallies while preserving turning room. The closer you are
to the fight, the more vertical turning room is required to allow an entry
and deny the bandit a shot opportunity.

Support fighter reentries can occur in either stabilized turning fights or
slow speed neutral fights. In either case, the support fighter must exit the
fight, gain turning room (as above) and look to reenter the fight in one of
the following three ways.

Support Fighter Reentries

Two types of reentries are the co-flow entry (also called the fan entry) and
the counter-flow entry. Depending on the progression of the fight, the
direction of turning in the fight and the position of the fight relative to the
support fighter, one type will be more advantageous than the other. You
might not always be able to choose which type you will use. Your first
priority is to get away from the fight to obtain turning room. Put the fight
at 5 or 7 o'clock. Once you have done this, you will need to turn back to
begin setting up your entry. Put the fight at 10 or 2 o’clock. The direction
you turn dictates a co-flow or a counter-flow entry.

AAM-9 D - 22


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_29.jpeg:
When coming back you need to make a conscious decision which way to
turn. Among the things to consider are keeping the tally/visual,
preserving turning room, not flying in front of the bandit and not
highlighting yourself. As a general rule, turn back in the direction that
will allow you to (in order of preference) not become threatened, keep the
tally/visual, have the quickest entry/shot and continue to turn in the
direction you are already going.

If your choice of entry requires a change of direction, then the earlier you
decide, the closer to the fight you will be and the easier it will be to keep
tally/visual. This reversal needs to be an initial hard turn to place the
fight on the other side of the tail, which will aid in rapid regain of
tally/visual.

Co-Flow Entry

The co-flow entry (Figure D-3) is one in which the support fighter enters
the fight going the same direction as the bandit.

SUPPORT
FIGHTER

ENGAGED FIGHTER

———
SS {

if BANDIT

AAM-09-03

Figure D - 3. Co-Flow Entry.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_3.jpeg:
AERIAL ATTACK MANEUVERING

COVER

AIR COMBAT MANEUVERING (ACM

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying the techniques of air combat
maneuvering. A thorough understanding of these techniques helps
distinguish engaged and support roles, and ACM geometries.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.00. eeeccceeseeesseeceseeseesaeecesacecensaeeeesaeeessaeeseenaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eeccccccessseecceesseeeecessseeecesesaeeeceesssaeeeseesssaeeesesssaeeeseeeeaaeeseee D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ o.oo eeecceessneeesseeeeesaeecesaeeeensaeesesaeeseseeeeeaees E-1
GLOSSARY. ee eeceeesecessneecesseeecesaeecesaeecessaeecesaeeseesaeecesaaesessaeeseeaeeeneas F-1


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_30.jpeg:
The advantage of the co-flow entry is that the line of sight is less;
therefore, it is easier to judge your entry. The disadvantage is that it
requires the bandit to be predictable and to not have you in sight. With
sufficient vertical turning room (5000-8000 feet), the co-flow entry can be
made from inside the bandit’s turn circle. It should be obvious that
airspeed awareness and power modulation will become a factor if
attempting more vertical entries.

Counter-Flow Entry

The counter-flow entry involves the support fighter and the bandit turning
in opposite directions (Figure D-4).

ENGAGED FIGHTER

—_——

SUPPORT
FIGHTER

f BANDIT

AAM-09-04

Figure D - 4. Counter-Flow Entry.

The advantage of the counter-flow entry is that the bandit will probably
not see the support fighter (assuming a benign background and a good
vertical split). The disadvantage is that the higher closure rates make the
entry harder to judge.

Judging your reentries will be based on the bandit’s nose position relative
to you and your distance from the fight. The rule of thumb for when to
start your reentry is the bandit’s nose passing through your position
relative to the fight. This rule of thumb is based on being approximately
2-3 nm away from the fight. If the altitude stack is sufficient, the bandit
will not be able to threaten you easily. Be aware, if the engaged fighter
does not fly good BFM, the bandit will be free of pressure and may be able
to change flight paths enough to threaten you. So, while waiting for your
reentry cues, be ready to use CMD and defeat the missile threat.

AAM-9 D - 24


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_31.jpeg:
Once the bandit’s nose position passes, you will need to rotate your lift
vector and lead turn the bandit. As you begin the reentry, it is a good
technique to notify the engaged fighter of your intentions with an
“EAGLE 2, IN FROM HIGH” call, for example. In-plane or out-of-plane
maneuvering will depend on the turning room available. HOTAS and
energy management are important areas to control as you enter the fight.
When choosing an auto acquisition mode, remember to consider the
proximity of the engaged fighter and the bandit. Boresight will be the
most discriminating mode. If you have radar problems or inadvertently
lock the engaged fighter, be ready to reattempt the lock or use a boresight
AIM-9. While pointing at the fight during the reentry, be sure to control
your airspeed to ensure you do not enter too fast or arrive at the bandit’s
turn circle with no energy. You should not hesitate to take deconflicted
shots. Just prior to reaching a position where you can maintain pressure
on the bandit and can accept the responsibilities of the engaged fighter,
you should call “EAGLE 2, ENGAGED.” Be ready for an “UNABLE” or
“NEGATIVE” call and the need to maintain deconfliction. You may also
have to give visual information to the flight lead. Follow-on BFM is very
critical here. Pointing at the bandit while entering the fight will lead to a
fast, high HCA entry and usually an overshoot. In the event of an
“UNABLE” or “NEGATIVE” call, have a plan to abort your entry and
maneuver for a new reentry if necessary.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_32.jpeg:
Slow Speed Fight Entry

The third way of reentering a fight involves entering a slow speed fight
that may be in a scissors or a tree. This is the hardest fight to enter and
requires the most communication to ensure intentions are understood.

The key to reentering a slow speed fight is to know that it is slow speed.
Entering with extra energy is still required but you will not want a
300-400 knot advantage. Initially, you will want to position yourself to
gain a perspective on the fight. This perspective and a “POSIT” or
“STATUS” call can help you be sure of which aircraft is which if you are
uncertain. If you are entering a tree or scissors, attempt to start your
entry behind the fight with 45-90° of angle-off. This will allow you to
maintain good tally/visual, keep some extra energy and maintain 3/9
control (Figure D-5).

"EAGLE 2,
KILL BANDIT,
SEPARATE 050"

"EAGLE 2, FOX 2"
"EAGLE 2, ~ wae ;
IN FROM [ —_—o a EAGLE 1
WEST,
EAGLE 1
POSIT,
HI / LO"

|
\

"EAGLE 1, ANCHORED,
ww ~=HI, SOUTH"

AAM-09-05

Figure D - 5. Reentry into a Slow Speed Fight.

AAM-9 D - 26


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_33.jpeg:
You will need to time your entry and shots to avoid crossing problems in
the slow speed fight. There is no need to call “ENGAGED” as the support
fighter since the response would be “UNABLE.” Just determine which
aircraft is the bandit, ensure shot deconfliction and kill the bandit as soon
as possible. The two things you cannot afford to do are to get three
aircraft slow in the same airspace or to dash through the middle of a slow
speed fight. It may be required to use the radio and directive
communication to ensure deconfliction. For example, “EAGLE 1, COME
OFF, HARD RIGHT NOW!” would build in some separation for a
deconflicted shot. Realize that you had better kill the bandit or you could
put your flight lead in a precarious position!

Areas to Avoid

In order to fulfill the support fighter responsibilities, you should avoid
being directly below or within 2 nm of the fight for prolonged periods.

Entering directly from below the fight poses problems. The fight is
probably descending down toward you, which may take away some of the
turning room you have just acquired. Also, you will bleed off energy as
you try to bring your nose up to enter the fight.

Trying to enter the fight from within 2 nm (horizontally) should be
avoided as well. Inside 12,000 feet, the support fighter may not have the
required turning room and G available to employ ordnance. This causes
(at best) rushed shots and (at worst) missed opportunities to engage.
More distance allows the support fighter time to predict the entry and
react to the situation. Flying inside 12,000 feet may also allow the bandit
opportunities to employ ordnance against you while the engaged fighter is
maneuvering and not posing an immediate threat.

Entering From Above the Fight

Depending on your experience, flying directly above the fight may force
the support fighter to focus attention on the fight geometry instead of
clearing the area for other bandits. If this type of entry is attempted, the
support fighter should be able to align turn circles easily, but must avoid
getting too fast during the entry.

This maneuver can be difficult and often results in an overshoot because
of the inability to slow down enough in a very nose low attitude. This is
known as the “high speed cheerleader” pass through the fight. However,
if done correctly, entering the fight from above can be an effective
maneuver.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_34.jpeg:
Reentry Exercises

When the bandit breaks into the support fighter, the best BFM maneuver
is to maneuver to the bandit’s turn circle for a lag maneuver. Once at the
turn circle, the support fighter will probably have lots of heading crossing
angles, but the flight lead should be pressuring the bandit around the
turn circle. At this point, the support fighter makes a choice of turning in
the same direction as the fight (co-flow) (Figure D-6) or turning in the
opposite direction (counter-flow) (Figure D-7). When going co-flow,
keeping the tally will help get the fight to 5 o’clock. When switching the
turn direction to counter-flow, using the visual on lead will help to place
the fight at 7 o’clock. On exiting the turn circle, the support fighter should
aggressively climb or descend to get out-of-plane, and extend away from
the fight for some horizontal turning room. Co-flow entries take a little
longer to develop, but are more easily controlled. Going counter-flow
generally results in the earliest reentry opportunity, but timing the entry
can be difficult.

"EAGLE 2,
FOX 2 KILL,
SEPARATE
NORTH"

"EAGLE 2,
ENGAGED"

"EAGLE 2, —_
OUT WEST" ~ NEC
{ ~\
}
~ A) KN
‘| "EAGLE 1, PRESS,
1's OUT NORTH"

"EAGLE 1, "EAGLE 2,
ENGAGED, TALLY"
12 O'CLOCK,

2 MILES"

AAM-09-06

Figure D - 6. Co-Flow Reentry Exercise.

AAM-9 D - 28


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_35.jpeg:
GLE 1, "EAGLE 2,
PRESS, 1's OUT NORTH" FOX 2 KILL,
SEPARATE

a

"EAGLE 2,
OUT WEST"

\ f f "EAGLE 2, ENGAGED"

"EAGLE 1, \ 2, \
ENGAGED, TALLY"
12 O'CLOCK,

1 MILE"

AAM-09-07

Figure D - 7. Counter-Flow Reentry Exercise.

High Aspect ACM Setups

While bracket and SSO entries to the merge were used to tie the intercept
to the merge, the scenarios included an unaware bandit whose
maneuvering was limited postmerge to BFM on the identifying fighter.
High aspect ACM is used to practice the more likely scenario of an aware
bandit at the merge and/or of a short-range pickup by the element, which
limits time to take turning room and requires quick reactions and
communication to affect a kill.

The short-range scenario provided by the butterfly setup should begin
with a “SNAPLOCK” or tally initiated “ENGAGED” call. The flight lead
should brief any rules for engaging short-range contacts. The roles must
be established. For this workbook, the wingman will begin as the support
fighter. Approaching the merge with the roles established allows both
fighters to better fulfill their roles while flying the best possible BFM.
Typically, if not announced over the radio, the aircraft merging with the
bandit is assumed to be the engaged fighter. The other fighter should be
able to gain a lead turn and fulfill support responsibilities as required.

In general, bracketing a high aspect bandit results in the earliest
opportunity for the fighter element to employ ordnance against the bandit.
A smart bandit will attempt to keep both fighters on the same side of his
aircraft. Do not let him! The bandit that turns away presents a WEZ to
the support fighter right away. The bandit that turns into the wingman is
a little more difficult to handle.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_36.jpeg:
High Aspect, Bracket, Turn Into, No Switch

The support fighter should get a lead turn and, depending on turning
room available, be able to shoot once lead is clear of the merge. If the
turning room is insufficient or shot deconfliction is a problem, as in
short-range pickups, the support fighter may be able to use the vertical to
quickly kill the bandit. The caution here is that the original engaged
fighter will most likely be anchored in a one-circle fight and the engaging
wingman will be trailing the bandit through a subsequent merge(s).

This makes deconfliction a problem. As the engaged fighter, if lead is
unable to leave the neutral situation due to BFM requirements or becomes
anchored or defensive, the wingman should expect to maintain
deconfliction responsibilities when maneuvering to kill the bandit. Shot
deconfliction problems will require patience due to the slow speed nature
of the fight.

If the vertical is unavailable, the support fighter should plan to execute a
fight exit to reentry. Slow speed fight reentry techniques will be critical.
From either case, expect the fighter in the one-circle fight to need to
separate straight ahead initially to gain airspeed (Figure D-8).

AAM-9 D - 30


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_37.jpeg:
"EAGLE 1,
ENGAGED,
12 O'CLOCK,

3 MILES"

"EAGLE 1,
MERGED,
HOSTILE, HOSTILE"

Y

"EAGLE 2,
FOX 2"

"EAGLE 1,
PRESS, 1's OUT SOUTH"

"EAGLE 2,
ENGAGED"

"EAGLE 2,

TALLY" AAM-09-08

Figure D - 8. High Aspect, Bracket, Turn Into, No Switch.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_38.jpeg:
High Aspect Bracket, Turn Into, Switch

The bandit may become aware of the support fighter as it approaches the
merge. In this case, expect the bandit to min range the engaged fighter’s
ordnance and break defensively into the lead turning support fighter.
This will be made clear when the bandit turns into the support fighter’s
plane of motion. Awareness of what both fighters are doing becomes
critical here. Whichever aircraft sees the switch needs to call “BANDIT
SWITCHED.” The support fighter should consider calling “ENGAGED,
ANCHORED, ONE-/TWO-CIRCLE,” expecting to hear “PRESS” to
exchange roles following a bandit switch (Figure D-8). If the bandit
continues to fight Eagle 2, Eagle 1 should have an easy co-flow entry,
provided the vertical is used properly. If the bandit switches back to
Eagle 1 for a one-circle fight, another “BANDIT SWITCHED?” call should
be made and if necessary, another role exchange should be accomplished.
Eagle 1 should have some extra lead turn and the support fighter should
be given an exit for a reentry as shown in Figure D-9.

An aware bandit or a late pickup may force the fighter formation to
engage in an offset formation. These scenarios are discussed based on
limited turning room and lead starting as the engaged fighter.

"EAGLE 1,
FOX 3 KILL,
SEPARATE WEST"

"BANDIT

SWITCHED" Page @

= PRESS" J JS

"HOSTILE, :
HOSTILE" \

( "EAGLE 2,
\ ANCHORED (
TWO-CIRCLE" |
"EAGLE 1,
ENGAGED,
12 O'CLOCK, "EAGLE 2,
TALLY"

3 MILES"

as

AAM-09-09

Figure D - 9. High Aspect, Bracket, Turn Into, Switch.

AAM-9 D - 32


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_39.jpeg:
High Aspect, Offset, Turn Into, No Switch

Attacking a high aspect bandit from an offset formation provides some
more difficult choices. However, the first priority is to fly your best BFM
while maintaining flight path deconfliction, so lead turn, lead turn, lead
turn (Figure D-10)! At the merge, it may be difficult to determine which
fighter the bandit is turning with, so clear communication is critical in
this engagement. If you are sure that you are the support fighter, you
may use your lead turn advantage and the vertical to achieve the first
shot. Be aware of your flight lead’s position for potential shot
deconfliction problems.

} "EAGLE 1, HOSTILE,
HOSTILE"

"EAGLE 2,
ENGAGED"

J
/ LEAD TURN EAGLE.
ANCHORED
_ TWO-CIRCLE"
"EAGLE 2, "EAGLE 1, ENGAGED,
TALLY" 12 O'CLOCK, 3 MILES" smunoe.ta

Figure D - 10. High Aspect, Offset, Turn Into, No Switch.
D - 33 AAM-9


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)
1. Identify engaged and support fighter responsibilities, role
establishment and exchange procedures, and the communications

used during element maneuvering in a visual arena.

2. Identify initial reactions to threat detection in the front, beam or
stern quadrants and subsequent maneuvering in a mature fight.

3. Identify ACM weapons employment and deconfliction

responsibilities.

REFERENCES

AFTTP 3-3 Volume XVII Chapter 4

AFTTP 3-1 Volume 17 Chapter 16

Volume 1 Attachment 1 -

Operational
Brevity Code
Words and
Terminology

AAM-9 B-1


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_40.jpeg:
The support fighter will not always be able to achieve a quick shot and
may need to maneuver to the control zone. As the support fighter becomes
the engaged fighter, deconfliction should shift to the element lead as the
support fighter. However, it is important to recognize the merge problems
associated with this scenario. Figure D-11 shows how a role exchange
occurs during a subsequent merge. If the roles were swapped late in the
two-circle fight, the new support fighter (lead) may still need to merge to
defend against the bandit’s missiles. The new engaged fighter will need to
keep some SA on both aircraft and shot deconfliction until after the merge
when the new support fighter can separate for a reentry.

"EAGLE, CHECK

“\. RIGHT, 310"
4

\ "EAGLE 1"

oS "EAGLE 2"

"EAGLE 2,
7 FOX 2"

~— —

"EAGLE 2,
KILL BANDIT, \ "EAGLE 1, MERGED, PRESS"
SEPARATE WEST" \,

AAN-09-11

Figure D - 11. Second Merge after Role Exchange.

AAM-9 D - 34


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_41.jpeg:
High Aspect, Offset, Turn Into, Switch

A disadvantage in this type of engagement with an aware bandit is that
both the engaged and support fighter are on the same side of the bandit’s
canopy. This makes it easy for the bandit to keep track of both fighters
and may make it possible for the bandit to switch between the two
fighters multiple times. If the bandit switches at the merge to the support
fighter, two options exist. The first option involves both fighters turning
two-circle (Figure D-12), which should allow lead to rate fight to an
advantage while the wingman continues to fight two-circle looking for an
advantage from another switch by the bandit. This scenario may lead to
subsequent merges but one of the fighters should have an advantage.
Poor BFM by either fighter here usually results in a free-switching bandit
in the middle of the formation.

/

"EAGLE 2,
ANCHORED
"EAGLE 2, TWO-CIRCLE"
TALLY" "EAGLE 1,
ENGAGED,
12 O'CLOCK,

3 MILES"

a XS BANDIT. % C
SWITCHED"

AAM-09-12

Figure D - 12. High Aspect, Offset, Turn Into, Switch, Two-Circle.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_42.jpeg:
The second option is for one of the fighters to take the bandit single-circle
at the merge to force a predictable fight and to keep the fighters aft of the
bandit’s 3/9 line (Figure D-13). This is usually best done by the second
fighter merging with the bandit if BFM will allow. The disadvantage here
is that one of the fighters must “get in the phone booth” with the bandit
while the other fighter works for the entry, sorts out who is who in the
single-circle fight and waits for shot deconfliction to happen.

"EAGLE 2,
ANCHORED
ONE-CIRCLE"

=
aad "BANDIT
SWITCHED"

(/ ¢

"EAGLE 2, "EAGLE 14,

TALLY" ENGAGED,
12 O'CLOCK,
3 MILES"

AAM-09-13

Figure D - 13. High Aspect, Offset, Turn Into, Switch, One-Circle.

There are many permutations possible in a high aspect ACM engagement.
The bandit may enjoy some initial freedom to switch, but should become
defensive quickly if the element is working together and fulfilling their
roles. No matter which scenario, the basic tenets remain the same—fly
your best BFM, maintain flight path deconfliction and maneuver to kill
the bandit.

AAM-9 D - 36


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_43.jpeg:
Engaging Other Threats

The support fighter’s job is to keep the engaged fighter free to kill the
bandit. In part, this means killing any bandit who may become a factor to
the fight. Often, the support fighter gets a tally on another bandit looking
for an entry on the engaged fighter. The support fighter must engage this
new threat and quickly kill the bandit before the engaged fighter is forced
to react. Radar contacts may present a threat as well. These contacts
must be analyzed in terms of their range and aspect in relation to the
fight. Normally, split criteria are briefed to give the support fighter a
decision making aid on whether to engage this new threat or monitor/drop
it. For more on split criteria refer to AFTTP 3-1, Volume 17.

Separation/Bugout

As discussed in the 2 v 1 intercepts section, the end result of each
engagement needs to be a separation from the bandit or a bugout from the
fireball. Deciding whether to reengage an alive bandit will be the flight
lead’s responsibility or based on defensive BFM requirements. If able to
bugout, exiting the area near the fireball is the primary concern. Regain
mutual support and formation as soon as the situation allows.

DEFENSIVE ACM

In order to prosecute/defeat a short-range attack, the bandit must first be
detected. Detecting bandits is a continuous effort. Element members
must clear the area around their flight for new bandits and multiquadrant
attacks. The complete attention of both element members cannot be
focused on a single bandit attacking them. The support fighter, in
particular, must be alert for additional bandits. Detection can occur
visually, with radar, RWR or from a GCI/AWACS point out. To
successfully defeat a short-range attack, visual acquisition by at least one
element member early in the defensive initial move sequence is essential.
Once the bandits are detected, a rapid assessment must be made of the
threat. If bandits are out of range and have insufficient closure, extend.
Bandits at or approaching weapons parameters must be countered with
an initial move by the element. In general, adhere to the following steps:
detect bandit(s), direct an initial move, defeat any attack with proper
BFM and AAMD, provide mutual support within the element and gain the
offensive or disengage/separate.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_44.jpeg:
The basis of successful two-ship defense is a system of well thought out
initial moves. The moves must effectively negate the initial attack. They
must be aggressive and designed to rotate the vulnerable cones away from
the threat. There is no room for error; initial moves must be simple and
easy to remember. Lastly, initial moves must become almost second
nature; only practice will help.

When the bandit is sighted in the aft quadrant approaching missile range
you should avoid putting both aircraft in the same area at the same time.
When possible, split the element laterally and vertically (i.e., good tactical
formation). In addition, the aircrew with the tally should simultaneously
start a hard/break turn into the bandit, direct the flight to maneuver with
communication and dispense chaff/flares as required. The aircrew
without a tally should turn as directed, dispense preemptive chaff/flares,
pull maximum Gs and attempt to acquire the tally.

The difference between a hard and break turn is power selection and
G-loading. In both cases, turn the aircraft to rotate your vulnerable cone
while bringing the threat to your nose. If the bandit is definitely outside
of weapons parameters and you have good energy, you may be able to
perform a good 8-10 AOA extension in full AB and separate out of the
fight. Be sure the bandit is far enough outside of a WEZ that you are
willing to bet your (and your wingman’s) life on it! A hard turn should be
called if a bandit is maneuvering for a shot but definitely not in weapons
parameters. Maximum AB in a hard turn assures maximum energy, but
be careful not to enter a WEZ in full AB. If the bandit is in position to
shoot or has taken a shot, a break turn in mil power or less while
dispensing chaff and flares offers the best defense. Afterburner should be
selected as soon as the bandit’s nose is no longer in position to shoot, or is
outside valid weapons parameters. If it is evident that the bandit intends
to pursue the attack, stores jettison may be appropriate, if so configured.

If it is apparent from the beginning that the flight cannot separate, the
object should be to defeat any bandit ordnance, sandwich the bandit and
achieve a kill or separation, or force the bandit to separate. The bandit
determines who is engaged; the other fighter maneuvers to bring ordnance
to bear. However, communication is still required so there is no
misunderstanding as to who the support fighter is (deconfliction
responsibility).

AAM-9 D - 38


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_45.jpeg:
Visual Lookout Responsibilities and Range Estimation

Primary areas for visual search are shown in Figure D-14. (The
designations 1A, 1B, 2A and 2B indicate the flight position and crew
position; e.g., 1A refers to the lead pilot, 2B refers to the wingman’s WSO.)
As the tactical situation changes, primary areas of visual search
responsibilities also change. Visibility across the formation to the outside
is degraded with increasing distance. At the maximum horizontal and
vertical separation, a bandit may arrive in a weapons envelope behind a
fighter before being visually acquired. Therefore, tactical formation
spreads depend on the size and type of threat expected.

1A

1B (PRIM) /\ 1B (SEC) \ 2B (SEC) j\ 2B (PRIM) !
 \ / \ [ \ /
N / N 7
\ i \ 7 \ | 7
ee ee ee i ae
~ AAM-09-14

Figure D - 14. Primary Areas of Visual Search.

Note that the pilots have primary responsibility for lookout forward of the
3/9 line and WSOs have the responsibility aft of the 3/9 line. A good
technique is to crew coordinate your visual lookout. For example, the pilot
would say, “I’m outside and to the right” and the WSO would concentrate
visual lookout on the left of the formation. Remember that an extra pair
of eyes is a great advantage in the visual arena. Do not squander that
advantage by having both crew members searching the same piece of sky.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_46.jpeg:
Figure D-15 shows the references for range estimation behind your
leader’s aircraft from line abreast formation. By using aircraft references
for 30° aft (just off the inlet ramp) and 60° aft Gust off trailing edge of the
wingtip), you can estimate how far behind the formation the bandit is. A
simple rule of thumb exists for the 45° aft reference of looking down the
wing line: the bandit’s range behind your wingman is equal to your line
abreast tactical range. For example, if you are 9000 feet line abreast from
your wingman, then the bandit is 9000 feet behind your wingman.
Getting exact ranges is not important, but knowing whether or not the
bandit is in a WEZ will determine whether you call for a break turn
versus a hard turn.

AAM-9 D - 40


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_47.jpeg:
AAM-09-15

Figure D - 15. Visual Lookout Bandit Range Estimation.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_48.jpeg:
Bandit Attack Options

A single bandit has four basic attack options: no switch, early switch, late
switch and uncommitted bandit at six. This section discusses each option
and an appropriate response.

No Switch

The bandit attacks one element member and does not switch. Response:
both Eagles should break into the bandit. In Figure D-16, the bandit
attacks Eagle 1 who flies the best possible defensive BFM while Eagle 2
flies the best possible offensive BFM to employ a missile. Eagle 2 must
use caution during the initial move to control the radar and AIM-9M
because of the potential for fratricide as the bandit and Eagle 1 are in
close proximity after 90-120° of turn when the shot opportunity occurs.
Eagle 1 cannot immediately separate from this attack unless the bandit
goes for pure pursuit and a high-angle snapshot. Eagle 2 must be
prepared to continue flying BFM should shot deconfliction, poor HOTAS or
bandit maneuvering deny the quick kill.

"EAGLE 2, "BANDIT,
FOX 2" 6 O'CLOCK, 9000"

POSSIBLE SHOT "EAGLE,

BREAK
LEFT"

EAGLE 2

"EAGLE 1,

aa
DEFENSIVE" EAGLE 1

AAM-09-16

Figure D - 16. No Switch.

AAM-9 D - 42


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_49.jpeg:
Early Switch

In this example, the bandit attacks Eagle 2, but switches quickly to

Eagle 1 (Figure D-17). The bandit starts the switch prior to losing 3/9 line
advantage (thus, early switch) on Eagle 1. Caution: do not confuse bandit
BFM with an early switch. Response: when the bandit switches, Eagle 1
should call “BANDIT SWITCHED.” Eagle 2 should continue to turn until
tally, then extend for energy and turning room, get out of plane and set up
an entry. Normally the flight cannot separate from an early switch.

Eagle 1 is now engaged and Eagle 2 has the option for a co-flow or
counter-flow entry.

"BANDIT SWITCHED,

"EAGLE 2, TALLY, 1's DEFENSIVE"

OUT NORTH"

"BANDIT,
6 O'CLOCK, 9000"

EAGLE 2 A A EAGLE 1

"EAGLE, BREAK LEFT"

AAM-09-17

Figure D - 17. Early Switch.

D - 43 AAM-9


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1.

2.

Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

Read ACM related chapters in AFTTP 3-1 and AFTTP 3-3.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_50.jpeg:
Late Switch

The bandit attacks Eagle 1 and then switches to Eagle 2 when ahead of
Eagle 2’s 3/9 line (Figure D-18). Response: Eagle 1 executes the initial
move in the called direction and strives for a tally. Eagle 2 breaks into the
bandit. When the bandit switches, Eagle 2 calls “BANDIT SWITCHED”
and meets the bandit at high aspect. The element can normally separate
on a late switch if Eagle 2 flies good BFM and merges 180 out with the
bandit. In this case, Eagle 2 is closest to the bandit and should make the
separation call. The separation normally looks like a 1-3 nm echelon/trail.
Eagle 2 must keep a tally during the separation to decide whether to
continue the separation or react defensively again. The element’s goal is
to separate and leave or to build enough separation to engage the bandit
high aspect after turning to engage.

——
"BANDIT SWITCHED"

"BANDIT,
6 O'CLOCK, 9000"

Ss
J "EAGLE 1,
DEFENSIVE"

—

AGLE 1 EAGLE 2
"EAGLE, BREAK LEFT"

mo

"EAGLE,
SEPARATE i
SOUTH" |
"EAGLE 1" \

AAM-09-18

Figure D - 18. Late Switch.

AAM-9 D - 44


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_51.jpeg:
Uncommitted Bandit

The bandit’s relative position may not clearly identify the F-15E under
attack. The bandit can come from any aspect. A quick assessment of the
bandit’s lethality to the flight must be made based on range and nose
position. If the bandit has not reached weapons employment parameters,
an extension (while monitoring the bandit) may be appropriate. If the
bandit presents a threat or continues to close, a prompt flight reaction is
required. This discussion addresses the principles valid for all potential
bandit attack axes. The initial move should accomplish five things: deny
a shot, present the bandit with maximum BFM problems, force the bandit
to commit on one or the other fighter, maximize the element’s offensive
potential after the initial move and clearly establish engaged (defensive)
and support fighter roles. Next, let us discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of a same direction break versus cross-turn, followed by
some examples.

There are several advantages to breaking in the same direction. The
aircraft on the outside of the turn is able to maintain tally throughout the
turn. The bandit must immediately commit against one fighter or the
other. The bandit’s offensive potential versus each fighter is no longer
identical. The element is in a position to establish defensive and support
fighter roles based on bandit reaction. Both aircraft can devote full
attention to flying the best BFM against the bandit since flight path
deconfliction is not difficult. Finally, each element member is able to
isolate the threat axis on the same side of their respective aircraft.

The second, but less desirable option, is to break the element toward each
other in a cross-turn or hard-to-six turn. There are several disadvantages
of the cross-turn including both fighters being in the same piece of sky,
which allows the bandit to delay the decision on which fighter to engage
until seeing a definite advantage. Also, element deconfliction is more
difficult initially, when the fighters should be more focused on the bandit.
A good stack by the wingman will reduce the deconfliction problem. A
cross-turn break may occur unintentionally for several reasons: a
simultaneous break call by both fighters (stepping on each other on the
radios) or in the heat of battle confusing which direction is left or right. If
this should happen, your best move is to continue the turn and be sure to
deconflict flight paths.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_52.jpeg:
Now let us look at some examples. Like everything in air-to-air, your
reaction to a bandit at your flight’s mutual six depends on several factors.
How far back is the bandit? Who is the bandit threatening most? With a

bandit at the fighter element’s mutual six, it is in each fighter’s best
interest to turn into the bandit. The most likely scenario is for one fighter
to pick up the tally and call the flight to break. Assume Eagle 1 sees the
bandit and calls “EAGLE, BREAK RIGHT.” This is an acceptable
response. If one aircraft is able to assess that the bandit is threatening
the other, he can call “EAGLE X, BREAK LEFT/RIGHT,” and can break
in the other direction to engage the bandit. The bottom line is that as
soon as a bandit is detected, the fighters must start moving and this
begins with communication. The appropriate action depends on the
fighter’s assessment of the bandit at the tally.

AAM-9 D - 46


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_53.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The operational brevity code word “PRESS” indicates

a. aircraft is maneuvering to achieve a kill.

b. fighter intent to engage a kill.

c. requested action is authorized, no engaged or support roles
are assumed.

d. continue the attack, mutual support will be maintained,

appropriate engaged and support roles exchanged.

In the ACM environment you hear “NEGATIVE” in response to
your “ENGAGED” call. You should

remain the support fighter and ensure deconfliction.
disregard and enter if you have a better shot.
request an alpha check.

remain the engaged fighter.

po op

The most important responsibility for the support fighter in an
encounter is

a. flight path deconfliction.

b. establishing an offensive posture and maintaining situational
awareness.

c. advising the engaged fighter of additional threats.

d. preparing to assume the engaged fighter’s responsibilities.

As the engaged fighter in an offensive ACM encounter, your
primary goal entails

a. killing the bandit.

b. maneuvering the bandit into the kill zone of the support
fighter.

c. keeping visual contact with the bandit until the encounter is
over.

d. releasing any flight lead responsibilities to the support
fighter.


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_54.jpeg:
5. A co-flow entry occurs when the support fighter enters the fight

at a 45-90° angle above the bandit.

at a 45-90° angle below the bandit.

turning in the same direction as the bandit.
turning in the opposite direction of the bandit.

a9 op

6. A counter-flow entry occurs when the support fighter enters the

a turning in the same direction as the bandit.
b. turning in the opposite direction of the bandit.
c at a 45-90° angle above the bandit.
d at a 45-90° angle below the bandit.

7. In defensive ACM tactics for a two-ship element, if a single bandit
is detected approaching weapons parameters and closing but has
not closed inside either fighter’s turn circle, the preferred option for
the fighter element is

a. breaking the element toward each other.
b. breaking the element in the same direction.
c. breaking the element in opposite directions.
d. continuing on their present flight path until the bandit
commits to either aircraft.
8. If a bandit is in a position to shoot or has taken a shot at you, a

turn in mil power or less while dispensing chaff and
flares offers the best defense.

a. hard

b. cross

c. break

d. counter-flow

AAM-9 E-2


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_55.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

AB Afterburner

ACM Air combat maneuvering

AFTTP Air Force Technical Training Publication

AIM Air intercept missile

AOA Angle of attack

ASAP As soon as possible

BFM Basic fighter maneuvers

BVR Beyond visual range

CMD Countermeasures dispenser

DACM Dissimiliar air combat maneuvering

DBFM Dissimiliar basic fighter maneuvers

HABFM High aspect basic fighter maneuvers

HCA Heading crossing angle

HOTAS Hands on throttle and stick

KCAS Calibrated airspeed in knots

MCM Multiple command manual

mil(s) Milliradian(s); 1 mil = 0.0573°, 1° = 17.45 mils, 1 mil
subtends approximately 1 foot at a 1000-foot range

MRM Medium range missile

NLT Not later than

nm Nautical miles


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_56.jpeg:
OACM Offensive air combat maneuvering

OBFM Offensive basic fighter maneuvers
SA Situational awareness

SRM Short range missile

SSO Single-side offset

VID Visual identification

WEZ Weapons employment zone

WSO Weapon systems officer

AAM-9 F-2


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_57.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAM-9


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_58.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_6.jpeg:
AAM-9

(This Page Intentionally Blank)


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

ACM is the link between basic intercepts and basic fighter maneuvers
(BFM). This lesson encompasses the critical elements of ACM, which
include premerge mechanics, element roles and responsibilities, element
communication, weapons employment, postmerge maneuvering, air
combat situational awareness and negating or separating from a threat.
While ACM is certainly not limited to a two-ship, the following discussion
will focus on the 2 v 1 employment aspects of a fighter element.

The three topics generic to all of ACM are fighter roles and
responsibilities, communication and weapons employment requirements.
These ACM elements are the foundation on which two aircraft can employ
to effectively kill or defeat a threat within lethal range.

FIGHTER ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

AFTTP 3-1 breaks down the possible roles of fighter aircraft into engaged
and support fighters. Each fighter in the formation must know what their
role is in an engagement to properly execute an attack or defeat a threat.
Once these roles are established, the responsibilities associated with each
role can be fulfilled. In all cases, every fighter is responsible for flying
effective BFM to avoid unnecessary losses and/or delays in killing or
defeating the threat.

Engaged Fighter versus Engaged

The difference between the term engaged and acting in the role of the
engaged fighter needs to be clarified. Engaged, as defined by AFTTP 3-1,
Volume 1, simply means the F-15E is maneuvering with the intent to kill.
This can apply anywhere on the BFM spectrum from offensive to
defensive. The majority of the time, this will apply to both F-15Ks.
However, setting the engaged fighter/support fighter roles must determine
two things: (1) who is doing their best BFM to kill/survive (engaged
fighter) and (2) who is ultimately responsible for deconfliction while also
executing smart BFM (support fighter).


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_8.jpeg:
Engaged and Support Roles

In an engagement, specific responsibilities must be assigned to each
aircraft. Effective communication is vital to fulfilling each fighter’s
responsibilities. In a 2 v 1 engagement, only one aircraft can be the
engaged fighter. The other aircraft assumes the support fighter
responsibilities. Roles can change several times during an engagement.
The appropriate responsibilities must be handed off and confirmed with
radio calls and aircraft maneuvers.

Engaged Fighter Responsibilities

e Best BFM to kill/survive — The engaged fighter executes its best
BFM to ultimately result in killing/surviving, no matter where it is
on the BFM spectrum—offensive/high aspect/defensive. The
engaged fighter’s game plan is the same as it would be if fighting
the bandit alone.

e Clear the F-15E’s flight path — Although the support fighter is
ultimately responsible for deconfliction, it does not relieve the
engaged fighter of clearing its own flight path. The engaged fighter
should strive to be tally and visual.

e Allow the support fighter to engage. If the support fighter becomes
defensive or has a more advantageous offensive entry and calls
“ENGAGED,” then the engaged fighter, if conditions permit, should
exchange the engaged/support fighter roles.

AAM-9 D-2


Text from AAM-9_ACM_page_9.jpeg:
Support Fighter Responsibilities

The support fighter’s list of responsibilities is longer because the job
changes with how offensive or defensive the engaged fighter is. The first
two responsibilities stand alone as the highest objectives for the support
fighter. Everything else is secondary. As the engaged fighter transitions
to being more offensive, the secondary responsibilities become as
important.

Maintain flight path deconfliction with the engaged fighter and
bandit. Beyond visual range (BVR), the support fighter must
remain visual. In the visual arena, the support fighter must
remain tally/visual or have constant SA of the bandit/engaged
fighter to ensure there is no chance of a flight path conflict.

Execute smart BFM maneuvers to avoid being shot and employ
ordnance with a clear field of fire. Smart BFM refers to the support
fighter’s maneuvering based on the engaged fighter’s BFM position.
If the engaged fighter is offensive, the support fighter’s goal is to
maneuver to achieve weapons separation for a missile shot. If the
engaged fighter is defensive, then the support fighter must
maneuver for immediate weapons employment. In this case, either
a missile or control zone entry to a gunshot is appropriate.

Secondary responsibilities include:

e Clear the fight for other adversaries that are a factor to the
element.

e Direct a defensive response or specific maneuver for weapons
deconfliction.

e Check own six.

e Maintain overall SA (area orientation, fuel and separation
opportunities).

These roles allow two aircraft to fight a threat with limited
communication and maximum awareness of what each fighter is
responsible for during an engagement.


