Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ
FISETX

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-GROUND WEAPONS
AGW-5
NUCLEAR WEAPONS INTRODUCTION

FEBRUARY 1999

(OFP N/A)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_10.jpeg:
Thermal Radiation

The intense thermal radiation generated by a nuclear detonation
comprises approximately 35 percent of the total energy released. It is
emitted as heat and light. The intensity depends upon the weapon yield.

There are effectively two surface temperature pulses. The first is of a very
short duration, and the second lasts for a much longer time (Figure D-4).

Light

The first pulse lasts about 0.1 second for a 1-megaton explosion. As a
result, much of the radiation emitted by the fireball during this pulse is in
the ultraviolet light region and is therefore not a significant heat hazard
for skin burns.

However, it is capable of producing permanent or temporary eye damage,
especially for those looking directly at the explosion. The flash from even
the smallest burst is enough to cause temporary flash blindness severe
enough to incapacitate an aircrew. This blinding flash of light is the first
manifestation of a nuclear explosion.

g | LIGHT

HEAT

RATE OF EMISSION OF
THERMAL RADIATION
(RELATIVE SCALE)

a
!

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TIME AFTER EXPLOSION IN SECONDS

EMISSION OR THERMAL RADIATION IN TWO PULSES

AGW-05-04

Figure D - 4. Thermal Radiation.

AGW-5 D-4


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_11.jpeg:
Heat

In contrast to the first pulse, the second radiation pulse may last for
several seconds (about 10 seconds for a 1-megaton explosion) and it carries
about 99 percent of the total thermal radiation energy emitted. Most of
the rays are either visible or infrared (invisible) light.

It is this radiation which causes skin burns of various degrees to
individuals up to 12 miles away, and eye damage at even greater
distances, from the explosion of a 1-megaton weapon. Since an aircraft
can suffer heat damage from thermal radiation, this pulse becomes a safe
escape consideration in delivery planning.

Highty-five percent of the fission energy from the nuclear bomb is
converted into blast, shock, and thermal radiation. The remaining 15% is
released as various forms of nuclear radiation (Figure D-5).

THERMAL
RADIATION
35%

INITIAL NUCLEAR RESIDUAL NUCLEAR
RADIATION 5% RADIATION 10%

AGW-05-05

Figure D - 5. Distribution of Energy.

D-5 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_12.jpeg:
Nuclear Radiation

This nuclear radiation consists of alpha particles, beta particles, gamma
rays, and neutrons. Of the 15% only about 5% constitute the nuclear
radiation produced within the first minute of the explosion. The final 10%
of the total fission explosion energy represents that of the residual (or
delayed) nuclear radiation which is emitted over a period of time.

Initial Radiation

The initial nuclear radiation consists mainly of gamma rays and neutrons.
This radiation, especially gamma rays, can travel great distances through
air and can penetrate considerable thicknesses of material. Although they
can neither be seen nor felt by humans (except in very large doses which
produce a tingling sensation), the rays produce harmful effects.
Consequently, the initial nuclear radiation is an important aspect of
nuclear explosions.

Residual Radiation

The residual or delayed nuclear radiation arises from the fission products
which, in the course of their radioactive decay, emit additional gamma
rays and beta particles. Beta particles are not a factor in aircrew safe
escape. The real danger from this type of radiation is direct contact to
skin or ingestion of contaminated food or water.

Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP)

The electromagnetic radiation from a nuclear explosion produces an
electromagnetic pulse that can cause extreme chaos in modern telephones,
radios, TVs, radars, computers, and other power systems. Groundburst
interference is confined to a relatively small area, but an airburst can
damage such facilities over enormous distances.

EMP can critically affect your aircraft. The need to coordinate strikes to

eliminate interference between our weapons and our strikers is very
important.

AGW-5 D-6


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_13.jpeg:
Figure D-6 shows a graphic representation of a nuclear bomb detonation.

SIMULTANEOUSLY THERE IS A RELEASE OF
INITIAL RADIATION, THERMAL AND NUCLEAR.

THE FIREBALL CIMIMISHES 4S DUST AND DEBRIS IS
CAUGHT UP IM THE CHIMNEY OF SMOKE AND
HOT GASES.

AIR HEATS TO 10,000,000? C IN THE FIREBALL WHIGH
DOES NOT TOUCH THE GROUND IN AN AIRBURST.

AIR RUSHES TQ FILL THE VACUUM LEFT BY THE
RISING FIREBALL TO CREATE THE MUSHROOM
CLOUL,

THE BOMBS ENERGY CONVERTS TO A BLAST WAVE
TRAVELING QUTWARDS AT THE SPEED OF SOUND.

pecan EN ET

Ao tHe,

THE RAGIOACTIVE CLOUD MAY RISE UP TO 15 MILES
THE FIREBALL RISES AT A RATE OF 250 MPH AS AND PENETRATE THE UFFER STRATOSFHERE.
THE HOT GASES EXPAND) OUTWARDS. asW-08-06

Figure D - 6. A Nuclear Bomb Detonation.


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_14.jpeg:
Relationship Between the Type of Detonation and Weapons
Effects

Airburst

The airburst (an airburst is defined as a burst where the fireball does not
touch the ground) is the most efficient use of a nuclear weapon because of
a phenomenon not found in a groundburst. In the airburst, part of the
initial shock wave travels directly down to the ground and is reflected
back into the air. The reflected wave then overtakes the horizontally
traveling initial wave (Figure D-7). The reflected wave tends to ride upon,
and reinforce, the dissipating initial wave (Figure D-8). The phenomenon
is called the MACH STEM or sometimes the MACH “Y” STEM. The burst
height cannot be excessive or the shock wave dies out prior to reaching the
ground.

e FIREBALL DOES NOT
REACH THE SURFACE

¢ MACH "Y" STEM

- TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT
OF REFLECTED SHOCK
WAVE AT THE SURFACE
IN AN AIRBURST

AGW-05-07

Figure D - 7. Mach “Y” Stem.

AGW-5 D-8


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_15.jpeg:
OVER

UNDER

TIME

VARIATION OF PRESSURE WITH TIME AT A FIXED LOCATION
AGW-05-08

Figure D - 8. Airburst with Mach “Y” Stem.

The airburst requires the greatest safe escape distance. The higher the
burst, the greater the escape distance required because the fireball, shock
wave, and radiation travel faster through the thinner air of higher
altitudes.

These factors, coupled with the MACH “Y” effects make the airburst the
most destructive. The airburst is also less dirty in terms of residue since
crater effects are not present and less radiated dust and debris are taken
up in the fireball.

Groundburst

When the fireball of a groundburst reaches the surface, much of the
energy of the burst is absorbed by the earth. Soil, rock, and debris are
vaporized and thrown into the air, resulting in a tremendous crater. The
dust and debris also absorb much of the thermal radiation from the
fireball.

Since much of the energy is used making the crater, the shock wave is
weaker than for an airburst of the same size. Most of the dust and
particles that are thrown out of the crater become radioactive. As a
result, the groundburst is the dirtiest type in terms of radioactive fallout
and residual radiation.

Due to the shielding of the thermal radiation and the loss of energy in

cratering, the safe escape distance required for the groundburst is less
than for an airburst of equal size.

D-9 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_16.jpeg:
Weapon Yield

All effects of detonation (blast, thermal radiation and nuclear initial and
residual radiation) increase with an increase in weapon yield; therefore,
larger yield weapons require greater escape distances.

The factors that govern the escape distance change as the yield increases.
The factors are controlled by a principle called the scaling laws.

The first states that the intensity of the shock wave varies as the cube
root of the increase in the yield. In other words, to triple the intensity of
the shock wave or overpressure at a specific distance from the detonation,
the yield must be increased 27 times.

Thermal radiation increases much more rapidly. According to the scaling
laws, thermal radiation increases as the square root of the increase in the
yield. In other words, to triple the intensity of the thermal radiation at a
specific distance from the detonation, the yield need only be increased
nine times.

This means the safe escape distance for the large yield weapons is
governed by the thermal radiation limits rather than the shock wave or
nuclear radiation limits. However, for the smaller yield weapons
(approximately 20 kiloton and below) the safe escape distance is governed
by the nuclear radiation limits to the aircrew rather than the two previous
considerations.

AGW-5 D-10


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_17.jpeg:
Aircrew/Aircraft Safe Escape
The safe escape distance required is based on being beyond the aircrew
safe limits to acceptable amounts of thermal and nuclear radiation, and

the aircraft structural/blast and thermal limits at detonation.

Target Conditions

In simplified terms, we can say that thermal radiation is reflected by ice,
water, snow, and high clouds. It is attenuated by haze, fog, or dust in the
air.

Therefore, the best target conditions for aircrew escape are a rough dirt
surface, no clouds, but high humidity and low visibility.

The worst condition for safe escape is a snow or ice covered surface with
low humidity and high cloud cover.

All escape distance charts are computed for worst possible conditions.

“No Damage Criteria”

The Air Force policy specifies a “no damage criteria” for nuclear delivery
aircrew/aircraft. If the escape maneuver is flown as outlined in the
delivery handbook, following proper delivery computations and escape
techniques, you will be safe.

D-11 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_18.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Although not as hazardous as the second pulse, the first pulse of
thermal radiation can

severely burn the skin.

cause a tingling sensation.

cause temporary flash blindness.
cause radiation sickness.

po op

2. What is the MACH “Y” STEM phenomenon?

3. All escape distance charts are compiled for worst possible conditions.

a. True
b. False

AGW-5 D-12


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_19.jpeg:
ANSWERS
c
The MACH “Y” STEM phenomenon is part of the initial shock wave
of an airburst that travels directly down to the ground and is
reflected back into the air. The reflected wave then overtakes the

horizontally traveling wave and reinforces and sustains it.

a

D-18 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AGW-5, March, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_20.jpeg:
SUSPENSION EQUIPMENT
Stations
The F-15E can carry one B-61 nuclear weapon on LC 2, RC 2, and on

stations 2, 5, and 8. The two conformals are designated the primary
stations (Figure D-9).

C AGW-05-09

Figure D - 9. Nuclear Weapon Stations.

CFT station 2 (bottom center) is the only nuclear capable station on a
CFT.

The PACS designates the priority station as L for station 2, C for station
5, and R for station 8.

Nuclear weapons can be released armed using the panic button only on
the CFT stations.

Due to a lack of encoders and decoders, carriage may only be possible on
the CFTs and the center station.

AGW-5 D-14


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_21.jpeg:
BRU-47/A

The bomb rack unit (BRU) 47/A is the suspension unit used at each
nuclear station to carry and release the B-61 (Figure D-10). The rack is
mounted internally in the station pylons. The pylons include a special

weapons relay panel containing circuits for bomb arming, monitoring, and
release.

RIFL UNLOCKED

O

RIFL
LOCKED

RIFL UNLOCKED

RIFL
LOCKED

@ UNLOC

@ Locke

yo N
fp ~~ &”

\ GROUND SAFETY
HANDLE - SAFED

GROUND SAFETY
HANDLE - ARMED

RIFL VISUAL RIFL VISUAL
INDICATOR - LOCKED INDICATOR - UNLOCKED

AGW-05-10

Figure D - 10. BRU-47/A.

D-15 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_22.jpeg:
In addition to the normal BRU-47/A parts, each BRU-47/A contains a
reversible in-flight lockout (RIFL) mechanism which is a safety and
failsafe provision for nuclear weapons. It is a spring-loaded mechanism
that safes the BRU-47/A until a 28 volts DC control signal from the
aircraft unlocks the RIFL. When the RIFL is locked the RIFL locked
visual indicator (a white tab) appears vertically in the RIFL window and
the marker on the allen set screw is to the right, similar to the hook locked
indicators (Figure D-10, left).

The ground safety mechanism is a safety lock actuated by a ground safety
handle which places a mechanical stop on the hook linkage and opens the
electrical circuits preventing power from reaching the cartridges. The
ground safety handle must be moved to the armed position before flight.
Arm and safe are labeled at the correct handle positions on the BRU
(Figure D-10, right).

To operate the weapons system, the aircrew must perform a series of
deliberate actions in the proper sequence. These actions come from
cockpit switch and MPD/MPCD button action through the CC to the PACS
and then to the weapon. These procedures are covered in a CBT lesson.

AGW-5 D-16


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_23.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Which stations are designated primary for nuclear weapons?

The bomb rack for nuclear weapon carriage is

different for each type station.

bolted directly to the aircraft.
mounted on the multiple ejector rack.
internally mounted in the pylon.

po op

AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_24.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. The two conformals are designated primary for nuclear weapon
carriage.

AGW-5 D-18


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_25.jpeg:
NUCLEAR SAFETY

Nuclear Mishap Definitions (AFI 91-204)

NUCFLASH

A reporting flag word identifying a nuclear weapon system accident which
could create the risk of war. This includes accidental, unauthorized, or
unexplained events meeting any of the following criteria:

Accidental, unauthorized, or unexplained actual or possible
nuclear detonation by US forces or US-supported allied forces.

Accidental or unauthorized launch of a nuclear-armed or
nuclear-capable missile by US forces or US-supported allied
forces.

Unauthorized flight or deviation from an approved flight plan by
a nuclear-armed or nuclear-capable aircraft of US forces or
US-supported allied forces which could be perceived as a hostile
act.

Broken Arrow

A reporting flag word identifying a nuclear weapon system accident which
could not create risk of war. This includes accidental, unauthorized, or
unexplained events and the following:

Nuclear detonation of a nuclear weapon.

Nonnuclear detonation (no nuclear yield) or burning of a nuclear
weapon, nuclear warhead, or nuclear component.

Radioactive contamination from a nuclear weapon or nuclear
component.

Public hazard (actual or implied) from a nuclear weapon,
nuclear warhead, or nuclear component.

D-19 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_26.jpeg:
Empty Quiver

Loss, theft, seizure, or destruction of nuclear weapon or nuclear
component. Loss includes, but is not limited to, intentional weapon
jettisoning according to approved Air Force procedures or inadvertent
release of a nuclear weapon or nuclear component.

Bent Spear

A reporting flag word identifying a nuclear weapon system incident. This
includes mishaps not in the accident category but meeting any of the
following criteria:

AGW-5

Radioactive contamination from burning, theft, seizure, or
destruction of a radioactive limited life component.

Major damage to a nuclear weapon or nuclear component that
requires rework, replacement, or examination or recertification
by the Department of Energy (DOE). (Report minor damage as
a nuclear weapon system safety deficiency.)

Events requiring immediate action in the interest of nuclear
surety (such as render safety procedures) or which could result
in adverse national or international public reaction or
premature release of information (such as attempted theft or
seizure of a nuclear weapon). This includes damage to a nuclear
weapon carrier that could lead to loss of, or damage to, nuclear
components.

Events indicating a nuclear weapon or nuclear warhead has
been armed.


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_27.jpeg:
e Events which could lead to a nuclear weapon system accident
and thus warrants the informational interest of, or action by,
any of the following agencies:

e Appropriate Military Department or Service.

e Office of the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense (Atomic
Energy).

e —- Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (International
Security Affairs).

e Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public
Affairs).

e Federal Emergency Management Agency (within the
CONUS).

Dull Sword

A reporting flag word identifying a nuclear weapon safety deficiency. This
includes mishaps not falling into the accident or incident categories, but
meeting any of the following criteria:

Minor damage to a nuclear weapon or nuclear component
requiring rework, replacement, or examination or recertification
by the design agency.

Minor damage to a nuclear weapon or nuclear component
affecting nuclear surety but not requiring return of the weapon
or component to the design agency. In general, report minor
damage to electrical components, mechanically activated
components, explosives, or radioactive materials and any
damage which could cause the nuclear weapon or nuclear
component to fail or malfunction; do not report minor structural
damage not affecting nuclear surety.

Exposure of a nuclear weapon or nuclear warhead to abnormal,
severe, or unusual environments outside the normal
stockpile-to-target sequence (e.g., flood, earthquake, or
lightning).

Structural failure of DOE handling equipment.

D-21 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_28.jpeg:
e Failure to function as designed or special tools listed in specific
item technical orders for the nuclear weapon system (except
common tools or test equipment).

e Abnormal status of any indicator on a nuclear weapon.
e Loss, theft, seizure, destruction, or jettison of a training weapon.
TO 1F-15E-25 Series

These technical orders and checklists are the “Bible” for nuclear weapons
operations and maintenance functions.

AFI 91 Series
AFI 91-101

The Air Force Nuclear Weapons Surety Program ensures personnel design
and operate nuclear weapons and nuclear weapon systems to satisfy the
safety standards in Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 3150.2, Safety
Studies and Reviews of Nuclear Weapon Systems, February 8, 1984. The
DOD safety standards are:

e There shall be positive measures to prevent nuclear weapons
involved in accidents or incidents, or jettisoned weapons, from
producing a nuclear yield.

e There shall be positive measures to prevent DELIBERATE
prearming, arming, launching, firing, or releasing of nuclear
weapons, except upon execution of emergency war orders or
when directed by competent authority.

e There shall be positive measures to prevent INADVERTENT
prearming, arming, launching, firing, or releasing of nuclear
weapons in all normal and credible abnormal environments.

e There shall be positive measures to ensure adequate security of

nuclear weapons, pursuant to DOD Directive 5210.41, Security
Policy for Protecting Nuclear Weapons, September 238, 1988.

AGW-5 D - 22


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_29.jpeg:
AFI 91-104
Two-man concept comprises:

e Two knowledgeable people that are required to agree on all
nuclear actions.

e Procedures which minimize the opportunity for incorrect or
unauthorized nuclear weapons procedures.

A no-lone zone is an extension of the basic two-man concept to require two
knowledgeable individuals to be present whenever access is gained to
nuclear weapons or critical aircraft components.

Safing and sealing provides a positive means of keeping arming and
releasing controls in a safe condition (safety wire) and a means of
detecting covert activation of these controls (coded lead seals on the safety
wire). This guards against both inadvertent activation and deliberate
activation.

Nuclear Weapons Personnel Reliability Program (PRP)

AFI 36-2104 establishes the program for screening, selection and
continuous evaluation of personnel who have control, have access to, or
control access to nuclear weapons, nuclear weapon systems, or nuclear
devices. Once cleared, personnel are continuously monitored for
reliability.

It may be the commander’s responsibility to ensure that all in his
command are familiar with and comply with nuclear safety rules, but the
aircrews who ultimately put the bombs on the targets absolutely must
know the rules and the system and ensure exact compliance and
operations.

In the history of the United States, there has never been an accidental
nuclear detonation.

D - 238 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-GROUND WEAPONS

C
a O
\f_ err ta H

==

COVER

NUCLEAR WEAPONS INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

This workbook covers the effects of nuclear weapons, basic operating
characteristics of nuclear weapons suspension equipment, and terms
associated with nuclear safety and command/control programs.

CONTENTS:

Ie EDO USGI exe ce ase ees ese sesame ses se aoe: ces seam Ses ee an cee: ator se ese ao so A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)..........0.eeeeseeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TERT wr sees sas ces cas wa one sane ws wats we sus eas ates as ee ant eas eS amt ae Ua nt OS aa ale Ma 8 D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ oo. eeeccccssneeceeseeecesaeesessneeessaeeeesaeeseseesensaees N/A
CS OIBIS AY cess ans sane anus aesn ssn news canis ave aise Sue MOR mS EMG NSS Mate MG GS ENG Mens ER A F-1

A-1 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_30.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
1. BENT SPEAR is the term for

a. an accidental nonnuclear detonation.

b. an incident resulting in damage to a nuclear weapon requiring
DOE rework or replacement.

c. an unexpected event that could contribute to a nuclear incident.

d. failure of personnel to adhere to established nuclear safety
procedures.

2. Checklists for nuclear weapon procedures are contained in the

TO 1F-15E-34 series.
TO 1F-15E-1 series.
TO 1F-15E-25 series.
AFM 3-1.

po op

3. No-lone zone is an extension of the basic two-man concept requiring

a. two knowledgeable individuals to be present whenever access is
gained to nuclear weapons or critical aircraft components.

b. two knowledgeable individuals to guard nuclear weapons when
they are in the same area as aircraft designated to carry them.

c. two people to upload nuclear weapons.

d. one knowledgeable person to escort anyone in an area where
nuclear weapons or critical aircraft components are stored.

4. The PRP program

a. provides for refresher training programs on nuclear weapons.
b. requires bi-yearly monitoring of reliability.
c. continuously evaluates personnel that have access to nuclear

weapons.
d. is activated only in time of war.

AGW-5 D - 24


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_31.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D-25 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_32.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-5 D - 26


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_33.jpeg:
BRU

CBT

CC

CFT

DOD

DOE

EDR

EMP

LC

MPCD

MPD

MT

PACS

PAL

PRP

RC

RIFL

TNT

USG

GLOSSARY
Bomb release unit
Computer-based training
Central computer
Conformal fuel tank
Department of Defense
Department of Energy
Escape distance required
Electromagnetic pulse
Left conformal
Multipurpose color display
Multipurpose display

Megaton

Programmable armament control set

Permissive action link
Personnel Reliability Program
Right conformal

Reversible in-flight lockout
Trinitrotoluene

Unique signal generator

AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_34.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the effects of nuclear weapons.

2. Identify the basic operating characteristics of nuclear weapons
suspension equipment.

3. Identify terms associated with nuclear safety and command/control
programs.

REFERENCES
TO 1F-15E-1

TO 1F-15E-25-1

NOTE

The nuclear block is taught for familiarization only.

AGW-5 B-1


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
questions.

2. Read references in the appropriate sections of TO 1F-15E-1 and
TO 1F-15E-25-1.

C-1 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AGW-5 C-2


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

AGW-05-01

Figure D - 1. Little Boy (Left) and Fat Man (Right).

BACKGROUND
LITTLE BOY

Size: 10.5 feet long, 29 inches in diameter.

Weight: 9700 pounds.

Force: 12,500 tons of TNT.

Mechanism: A five-pound “bullet” of uranium 235, fired down a
barrel at a 17-pound U-235 target. When the two pieces met, a
chain reaction occurred.

Origin of name: Originally called Thin Man, after Franklin
Roosevelt; name was changed to Little Boy after barrel was
shortened.

Delivery: Dropped on Hiroshima by the Enola Gay, a B-29 bomber.
Detonated at 8:16 a.m., Aug. 6, 1945, 1890 feet above Shima
Surgical Hospital.

Casualties: By the end of the year, at least 140,000 dead.

D-1 AGW-5


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_8.jpeg:
FAT MAN

Size: 10.66 feet long, 5 feet in diameter.

Weight: 10,000 pounds.

Force: 22,000 tons of TNT.

Mechanism: Two hemispheres containing plutonium driven together
by conventional explosives, setting off a chain reaction.

Origin of name: Named after Winston Churchill.

Delivery: Originally destined for Kokura, Japan, but pilot of the
B-29, Bocks Car, faced fire there and turned to secondary target,
Nagasaki. Detonated at 11:02 a.m. on Aug. 9, 1945, 1650 feet
above the city.

Casualties: 70,000 deaths by the end of the year.

WEAPONS EFFECTS
Basic Weapons Effects
The basic weapons effects from all nuclear detonations can be broken

down into blast and shock, thermal radiation, and nuclear radiation
(initial and residual) (Figure D-2).

DESTRUCTION - 50 MT BOMB

TOTAL DESTRUCTION - 3.2 MILE RADIUS
LOSS OF LIFE - 20 MILE RADIUS

FIRES - 40 MILE RADIUS

SOME EFFECTS - 70 MILE RADIUS

AGW-05-02

Figure D - 2. Mushroom Cloud and Destruction.

AGW-5 D-2


Text from AGW-5_Nuclear_Weapons_Introduction_page_9.jpeg:
Blast and Shock

Approximately fifty percent of the energy released in a nuclear detonation
is released in the form of a shock wave or blast wave. The wave resembles
a sonic boom but is much more intense. It is characterized by a very
large, rapid increase in the atmospheric pressure (“overpressure”). This is
followed by a less rapid decrease in overpressure which leads to an
underpressure before recovering to ambient pressure (Figure D-3).

The intensity of the wave varies with the strength of the detonation. The

rate of dissipation of the wave depends upon the surrounding atmospheric
conditions and the height of the burst.

OVER

AMBIENT PRESSURE

UNDER

TIME
VARIATION OF PRESSURE WITH TIME AT A FIXED LOCATION AGW-05-03

Figure D - 3. Pressure Variance.

D-3 AGW-5


