Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIR-TO-AIR WEAPONS
AAW-6
GUN
FEBRUARY 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_10.jpeg:
HEI / HEI-T (Tracer)

The M56 high-explosive incendiary (HEI) cartridge (Figure D-2) is used
against aircraft and light material targets. The projectile functions with a
combined detonation and incendiary effect after target impact. The fuze
features a mechanical point detonating system protected by an aluminum
cover that crushes on impact. When fired, both acceleration and friction
forces on the ball rotor and the c-ring prevent any detonator-in-line
movement until muzzle exit. When acceleration decreases and projectile
spin rate exceeds 49,800 rpm, the locking c-ring opens due to centrifugal
force. This allows the detonator to align with the firing pin and booster
charge. Arming is complete 20 to 35 feet in front of the aircraft. The
length of the explosive train creates a 300 millisecond explosion delay at
impact. This delay allows four to six inches of penetration of a truck-type
target.

FIRING PIN FIRING PIN
COVER

NOSE CAP
CENTRIFUGAL
ROTOR SAFETY
SPRING DETONATOR
ROTOR ASSEMBLY

BODY —_,

DETONATOR

U-SHAPED
CENTRIFUGAL
ROTOR

SAFETY SPRING

DETONATOR
ROTOR ASSEMBLY

BOOSTER
ASSEMBLY

M505A2 M505A3

AAW-06-02

Figure D - 2. HEI Cartridge.

AAW-6 D-4


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_11.jpeg:
PGU-27/B Target Practice (TP)

The PGU-27/B TP cartridge replaces the M55 cartridge. The PGU-27/B is
an inert projectile with a steel body and a solid aluminum alloy nose as
shown in Figure D-8. The cartridge uses the same case primer and a
slightly modified WC872 ball propellant, designated the WC867. The
total cartridge length remains unchanged; therefore, no changes to the
gun or ammunition handling and storage equipment are required (versus
the M55 cartridge). Due to the improvements in aerodynamic shape, drag
has been reduced approximately 33%, velocity is increased by 36% at 1000
meters and time-of-flight (TOF) is decreased by 39% at 1000 meters.

ROTATING BAND
\ SOLID ALUMINUM NOSE

_ BODY

AAW-06-03

Figure D - 3. PGU-27B TP Projectile.

D-5 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_12.jpeg:
PGU-28/B Semi-Armor Piercing High Explosive Incendiary (SAPHEI)

The PGU-28/B (Figure D-4) projectile replaces the M56 HEI projectile.
The body of the PGU-28/B is machined from 15B27 steel bar stock and
then hardened to improve performance against lightly armored targets
such as APCs and armored helicopters. Projectile components consist of
two incendiary compounds, a high explosive, a zirconium pellet, a copper
rotating band, and aluminum nose and support disk. The Type I nose
incendiary is ignited by the mechanical shock of impact. The nose
incendiary reaction ignites the more energetic Type II body incendiary,
which in turn initiates the high explosive. The burning of the pyrotechnic
material produces a delay, allowing the projectile to penetrate into the
target before detonating. The high explosive reaction splinters the
hardened steel body of the projectile and ignites the zirconium pellet
providing a long, persistent spark for improved fire start capability.

COMP A-4
EXPLOSIVE

BODY INCENDIARY

ZIRCONIUM
PELLET,
NOSE INCENDIARY

Truman
NOSE
SUPPORT

HARDENED DISC

NOSE

AAW-06-04

Figure D - 4. PGU-28/B SAPHEI Projectile.

AAW-6 D-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_13.jpeg:
Ammunition Container

The ammunition container is mounted in the center of the aircraft
fuselage. It stores 485 rounds of ammunition, transfers them to the
conveyor, receives spent casings and unfired rounds from the conveyor,
and puts them back in storage (Figure D-5).

Conveyor

The conveyor transfers rounds to the feeder. It also accepts spent cases
and unfired rounds from the unload drive assembly, and returns them to
the container. The conveyor holds 69 rounds for a total system capacity of
504 rounds.

Gearbox and Power Supply

The gearbox uses hydraulic power to turn the conveyor assembly. It also
powers the unload drive assembly through a drive shaft. The power
supply (driven by Utility B) is mounted on the gearbox, and can provide
up to a 6000 round per minute firing rate. It also performs a braking
function during gun deceleration. The gun spin up time is .4 seconds.

GEAR BOX
ASSEMBLY
f AMMUNITION
CONVEYER ~~ CONTAINER
I ~~ HYDRAULIC

om DRIVE
eo
a

AAW-06-05

Figure D - 5. Gun.

D-7 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_14.jpeg:
Firing Cycle

If the gun is externally preflighted to be hot, the landing gear handle is
up, the master arm switch is in arm and the PACS is not in a training
mode, then the gun will fire when the trigger is squeezed to the second

detent.
CAUTION

The weapon select switch (FCP) does not
have to be in GUN to fire the gun.

Rounds are picked up by bolts in the main cam path. As the bolts slide
forward in the firing cam they chamber the round. The bolt is locked into
place and firing voltage is applied. After firing, the bolt is unlocked and
extracts the round from the chamber. After extraction, the round is
ejected into the unload drive assembly.

Clearing Cycle

When the pilot releases the trigger, round fire and counting voltage are
maintained until hydraulic braking action decelerates the gun. The delay
between trigger release and the point at which incoming rounds are no
longer chambered and fired is such that five to eleven rounds fire after
trigger release. As the gun decelerates through 3900 +150 rounds per
minute, all six bolt assemblies are locked in the cleared position. The time
period between the last round fired and complete gun stop results in six to
nine live rounds clearing the gun and returning to the ammunition
container assembly. Total time from trigger release to gun full stop is
slightly under one second.

AAW-6 D-8


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_15.jpeg:
GUN PREFLIGHT
Control and Safing

Rounds Limit Switch, Limit Counter and Totalizer

This assembly, located at the bottom of the ammunition container,
performs the safing and limiting function for the amount of rounds to be
processed. The totalizer (1 in Figure D-6) records the total number of
rounds fired over the life of the system.

HYDRAULIC -

MANUAL 2 5
OU a Ebest Uolisliollelfe|

DOOR 45
(OPENED)

AAW-06-06

LOAD GATE ©
TANGS

(6) CARTRIDGE
GUIDE TANGS

AMMO (5)

5

Figure D - 6. Gun Control and Load.

D-9 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_16.jpeg:
If set to RDS LIMIT with a limiter count of 799 or less (2 in Figure D-6),
the rounds limit switch (3 in Figure D-6) controls the number of rounds
fired by the gun on any one sortie. When the preset amount has been
processed, the rounds limiter signals the PACS to start the clearing cycle,
and gun motor shutdown. If the gun is at full firing speed, up to

20 rounds in excess of the number set in the limit counter may be
processed. The gun is hydraulically safe after limiter shutdown since the
limit count will then be in the range of 979-999.

At gun motor shutdown, the HUD rounds count displays XXX to indicate
that the LIMIT (or total) rounds have been expended. In RDS LIMIT
(with a limiter count of 800-999), the gun is hydraulically safe. If the
switch is in NO LIMIT, only the electrical safing pin and cam holdback
tool/download pin prevent electrical firing pulses and rounds being
chambered when the trigger is squeezed.

Hydraulic Manual Control Handle

Checking that the handle (4 in Figure D-6) is in the stowed (flush) position
ensures the gun hydraulic motor is not in a load mode, but is ready for
firing.

Type Ammo

The type of ammo loaded (5 in Figure D-6) may be observed at the load
gate. The type and quantity of ammo loaded will be listed in the AFTO
Form 781A. AFTO Form 781H (block 11) should be checked first to find
the correct page and block reference to look at in the 781A.

Load Gate Tangs/Cartridge Guide Tangs

The load gate tang and cartridge guide tangs (6 in Figure D-6) should be
properly positioned. These tangs are separated during the gun loading
process. After loading, the tangs are positioned back together (tips-to-
tips). The tangs form the ammo pathway to the gun and therefore should
be positioned together properly so as to provide a smooth sliding surface
where the ammo passes.

AAW-6 D-10


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_17.jpeg:
Armament Ground Safety Pin

This pin (1 in Figure D-7) opens a switch that interrupts firing voltage to
each round.

Cam Clearing Holdback Tool/Download Pin

This tool/pin (2 in Figure D-7) mechanically holds the cam open, and
prevents rounds being chambered.

@)

CLEARING
HOLDBACK
TOOL/
DOWNLOAD
PIN

ARMAMENT GROUND

SAFETY PIN ;
oe al

DOOR 42

AAW-06-07

Figure D - 7. Gun Safing.

Last Round Switch

The last round switch senses casings and projectiles as they pass through
the feed system at the hand-off unit. When two consecutive empty casings
are sensed, the PACS initiates the clearing cycle and disables gun motor
power. The system is shut down to prevent damage that would result
from chambering a spent round.

D-11 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_18.jpeg:
Exterior Inspection
This includes the cold gun safing procedures which render the M61A1
electrically, hydraulically and mechanically safe (see earlier sections). It
is absolutely essential that the Dash 34 checklist items are verified. As
always, if there are any doubts or questions concerning the weapon, call
for a specialist!
The following sequence is the procedure for inspecting a hot gun:

e Ammo loaded - TYPE/QUANTITY

e Armament ground safety pin - INSTALLED

e Gun clearing sector tool/download pin - NOT INSTALLED

e Rounds limit counter - SET AS REQUIRED

e Rounds limit switch - CHECK & SET

NOTE

If a limit counter is set above 799 with limit switch in LIMIT, the

gun will not fire.

AAW-6 D-12


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_19.jpeg:
e Hydraulic manual control handle - STOWED POSITION (FLUSH)

e Load gate and cartridge guide tangs - PROPERLY POSITIONED

CAUTION

Ensure that load gate arms latch
around the tangs of the load gate
slide or gun system may not function.

NOTE
mode or the master arm is safe.
The following sequence is the procedure for inspecting a cold gun:
e Ammo loaded - AS REQUIRED
e Armament ground safety pin - INSTALLED INSIDE OUT
e Gun clearing sector tool/download pin - INSTALLED
e Rounds limit counter - SET TO 900

e Rounds limit switch - RDS LIMIT

e Hydraulic manual control handle - STOWED POSITION (FLUSH)

D-18 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: AAW-6, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_20.jpeg:
PACS PROGRAMMING

Two types of 20mm bullets are now available for the F-15E. On the A/A
weapon load page, the capability is provided to identify both the type and
quantity of bullets loaded (Figure D-8).

7MH 7
A/ACOMBAT
WEAPON LOAD

[No
|

OyOyo

ON
ma + \

AIG
TRNG

AIA
TRNG

AIG NUC
LOAD LOAD LOAD

TOP LEVEL PACS MENU A/A TRAINING WEAPON LOAD
(A/A TRNG BOXED) (A/A TRNG BOXED)

AAW-06-08

Figure D - 8. Load.

AAW-6 D-14


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_21.jpeg:
Quantity is loaded using PB #1 and #2. Bullet type, PGU-28 or

M-56, is displayed under PB #20. The selection between these two is
toggled by pressing PB #20. The training mode bullet type may be
different from the combat mode bullet type. Selection can also be made at
the AFMSS and entered via the DTM. The bullet counters displayed on
the PACS and HUD are for aircrew information only, and will not effect
gun arming/dearming.

NOTE

Failure to program properly can cause excessive errors in gunsight
computation.

On all other displays where round count is found, the count is followed by
a “P” for the PGU-28 and “M” for the M-56, except on the HUD where type
is not indicated (Figure D-9). The last digit in the PACS and HUD bullet
count will be replaced by a “T” when the A/A TRNG mode is selected on
the PACS top level menu or A/A load page.

A/G CMBT

™
PWR

STBY
120A

STBY
7M

CBT 1 C STORE
CBT 2 LR PYLON

AAW-06-09

Figure D - 9. Round Count Displayed.

D-15 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_22.jpeg:
GUNSIGHT MODES

The gunsight has two operating modes: the gun director sight (GDS) mode
and funnel (FNL) mode. The director mode provides the pilot with an
accurate, all-aspect gunsight. The FNL mode (with certain limitations)
provides an accurate backup gunsight by allowing the pilot to compare
target wingspan to the funnel width. The primary benefit of the funnel is
that it allows the pilot to estimate target range by comparing wingspan to
funnel width to achieve a best guess firing solution with no radar track.

NOTE

In this lesson, radar tracking is when the radar is in single target

track. Gun tracking is target tracking by the pilot using HUD
aiming symbology.

GDS Mode

The director mode provides the pilot with an accurate all-aspect gunsight
that eliminates the requirement to obtain steady-state tracking condition.
The director reticle is displayed only after final radar track with JEM
resolved, a 1.5 second settling time delay, and valid data available for use
in the solution. CC director mode computations take into account target
velocities, accelerations and estimated future target position. CC
computations also include compensation for both bullet trajectory and
target dynamics during the bullet's time of flight. Due to computational
“smoothing,” the sight lags somewhat following heavy target
maneuvering. With that one exception, coincidence of the reticle and
target represent a correct aiming solution for the pilot.

One advantage of the director mode is the elimination of the necessity to
fire early in anticipation of bullet TOF. A second advantage is that the
director gunsight does not require steady state pipper-on-target tracking
for accurate reticle aiming. However, the probability of achieving hits is
greatly improved with a short bullet TOF and low target relative LOS
rates.

AAW-6 D-16


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_23.jpeg:
These advantages are a result of the director mode software (GDS
algorithm). The software uses radar tracking data in its lead angle
computations. The lead angle computations are independent of F-15E
maneuvering and accelerations. Thus, firing solutions are obtained
quickly, and rapid attitude changes have little short term effect on the
required lead angle.

The director gunsight does not dampen reticle motion caused by F-15E
maneuvering. Motion of the director reticle caused by variations in F-15E
acceleration is a true representation of bullet stream dynamics. Selecting
stiffen with GDS or GDS funnel selected reverts the gunsight to a LCOS
track funnel display with a tracking LCOS reticle at the radar target
range. If either range or range rate is not available, 1000 feet and/or -50
FPS respectively is used to display the LCOS reticle. When stiffen is
released, the previously selected gunsight returns.

Funnel (FNL) Mode

The funnel is a reference target system. It was designed on the premise
that the F-15E could out turn its opponents to saddle up and track. It
assumes that the F-15E is in the target’s plane of motion (POM), with

45° or less angle off. It also assumes F-15E and target G are the same.
The sight shows where bullets will be one TOF from trigger squeeze, if the
parameters remain constant.

The funnel is calculated using the lead computing optical sight (LCOS)
algorithm and only own ship data with the one exception that radar range
and/or range rate are used when available. The funnel is computed based
on the assumption that the target is performing the same maneuvers as
the F-15E shooter, thus the funnel responds to changes in F-15E
acceleration. The appearance and accuracy of the funnel is determined by
the availability and quantity of radar data.

D-17 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_24.jpeg:
The center of the funnel corresponds to pseudo LCOS reticles with the
width of the funnel equating to a 40-foot wingspan target at seven
computed ranges (750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 2250, 4000 and 5000 feet). The
points are joined together to form the funnel. The end of the funnel is
limited to bullet maximum range when less than 5000 feet. With no radar
track, three 2-mil pippers are displayed in the middle of the funnel at
ranges of 1000, 2250 and 4000 feet with PGU-28 bullets. With M56
bullets loaded only 1000 and 2250-foot pippers are displayed.

The pilot must fly to put the target within the funnel at the appropriate
range to achieve bullet solution. Target range can be estimated using the
funnel width corresponding to a 40-foot wingspan target. The funnel may
be used as either a tracking reference or a dampened bullet position
indicator. As a tracking sight, the pilot must achieve a position that
allows the appropriate section of the funnel to be stabilized on the target
when the gun is fired. G must be held constant to achieve a stable sight
picture for a tracking gun shot.

If a stable tracking position is not viable while in the FNL mode, the
funnel can be considered a dampened bullet position indicator. The
aircraft should be flown so that the target and funnel (at the correct target
range) are moving toward a common intercept point. The pilot fires when
the funnel center is judged to be displaced approximately one TOF plus
gun spin up time from intercept. If parameters are held constant, bullet
position will be coincidental with the funnel center. The pilot must
anticipate such that the bullets will be in the proper funnel position/range
when it intercepts the target.

AAW-6 D-18


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_25.jpeg:
HUD GUNSIGHT DISPLAYS

There are four possible HUD displays that you will see when selecting
GUN on the weapon select switch (or combined mode entry). These
displays are the LCOS search funnel, LCOS track funnel, GDS and GDS
funnel. Radar track and funnel selection status impact which display will
be seen. Also, if in SRM, the combined SRM/gun displays are selectable.
The gun cross is displayed when the master arm switch is in ARM.

Figure D-10 presents switchology to select the four different gunsight
displays.
SELECT GUN ON WEAPON

SELECT SWITCH
(OR COMBINED MODE ENTRY)

V
RADAR FINAL STT

LCOS TRACK
FUNNEL

YES NO

a4 COOLIE RELEASE a

>| ~COOLIE DOWN —
AND HOLD
IF IN COMBINED MODE)

COOLIE RELEASE
GDS FNL (GDS) —S————
= =>] COOLIE DOWN —>
AND HOLD
COOLIE UP

(LESS THAN 1 SECOND
IF IN COMBINED MODE)

GDS (GDS FNL)

COOLIE UP
(LESS THAN 1 SECOND

LCOS SEARCH
FUNNEL

SS RADAR BREAK
LOCK-ON

AAW-06-10

Figure D - 10. Gunsight Display Selection.

D-19 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_26.jpeg:
LCOS Search Funnel

Figure D-11 shows the LCOS search funnel gun aiming display. This
display is in the HUD when GUN is selected on the weapon select switch
and the radar is in search. This is the only available gun display without
a radar lock-on. The funnel is used to help align in plane with the target
to achieve a stable tracking state.

The funnel is simulating the bullet stream flowing away from the F-15E.
The top of the funnel is for closer ranges, the bottom end of the funnel is
for maximum ranges. The funnel is very dynamic during maneuvering as
is the bullet stream.

1000 FOOT PIPPER

2250 FOOT
PIPPER

RATR

ROUNDS
REMAINING

4000 FOOT
PIPPER

FUNNEL

AAW-06-11

Figure D - 11. LCOS Search Funnel.

AAW-6 D - 20


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_27.jpeg:
The three pippers (2-mil circles) are located at set ranges of 1000, 2250
and 4000 feet aiming ranges. The width of the funnel at each range is
determined by the apparent width of a 40-foot wingspan aircraft located
at that range (a form of stadiametric ranging). If the target aircraft is
tracked in the funnel with one of the pippers on the target and if the
target is visually judged to be at the set range defining that pipper, then
the bullets should pass through the target.

The rounds at target range (RATR) cue (inverted triangle) displays the
location of your bullets arriving at a pseudo target range of 2250 feet. For
displays with radar lock-on, the RATR will indicate the location of bullets
at radar target range. The RATR is displayed from arrival of the first
bullet until arrival of the last bullet in the fired stream of bullets. It takes
into account bullet ballistics, atmospheric data and F-15E maneuvering.
The RATR should not be used as an aiming device. The RATR is not HUD
limited; it will not be displayed when the computed position is outside the
HUD FOV.

The rounds remaining display indicates the approximate number of
bullets on board as loaded in the PACS and not yet expended. During gun
fire, the HUD (and PACS) count of rounds remaining decreases ten at a
time (i.e., 500...490...480, etc.).

D-21 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_28.jpeg:
LCOS Track Funnel

The LCOS track funnel display (Figure D-12) provides additional
symbology/data when compared to the search funnel display. The
additional symbols/data are derived from radar track information. The
LCOS track funnel is presented until final stable radar single target track
(STT). When the radar attains stable STT, the GDS or GDS FNL will be
displayed depending on the last selection.

RADAR RANGE
BAR

2 MIL
PIPPER

25 MIL CIRCLE

AAW-06-12

Figure D - 12. LCOS Track Funnel.

The reticle (2-mil pipper and 25-mil segmented circle) is positioned down
the center locus of the funnel based on target range/range rate and own
ship maneuvering parameters. If target range is not valid, 2250 feet (or
1000 feet stiffened) is used, and 50 FPS is used if range rate is not valid.
The funnel is also moving based on the same data. If the pipper is held on
the target in a stable tracking situation, the bullets should arrive at the
target one time of flight after trigger squeeze.

If reticle stiffen is selected while in GDS or GDS FNL, the LCOS track
funnel will be displayed while the FCP coolie switch is held down. The
range bar is provided to show radar derived range in an analog “clock
type” format. The bar starts at twelve o’clock and moves clockwise. The
leading edge of the bar shows range by clock position in thousands of feet
(e.g., 3 o'clock is 3000 feet range).

AAW-6 D - 22


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_29.jpeg:
GDS

The GDS (or GDS FNL) display (Figure D-13) is available in GUN (or
combined mode) with a full radar system lock-on. Moving the FCP coolie
switch up will toggle between GDS and GDS FNL displays.

RATR BULLET MAXIMUM RANGE (BMR) CUE

2 MIL
PIPPER

50 MIL
RETICLE

GDS
RANGE SELECTED

AAW-06-13

Figure D - 13. GDS.

“GDS” is presented in the lower right side of the HUD (window 17) to
indicate GDS selected. The 2-mil pipper/50-mil reticle/turn plane line are
dynamically positioned based on own ship maneuvering and target radar
range/range rate/maneuvering data. If the pipper is on the target at
trigger squeeze, bullets should hit the target if within bullet effective
range.

The turn plane line (GDS only) represents the CC computed projection of
the target’s plane of motion (POM). It can be used as an aid to achieving
an in-plane solution during high aspect gun attacks. The line is drawn
from the gun cross, through the reticle, to the edge of the HUD.

D - 238 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_3.jpeg:
AIR-TO-AIR WEAPONS

COVER

GUN
INTRODUCTION
This workbook is your guide in studying the characteristics, general

operating and employment procedures for the M61A1 gun system prior to
the lecture.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 000. eececeesneccesnceeeesaeesesaeeseesaeecssaeeesssaeeesseeeesaees A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)............eee eee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00... eee eeeeeeeeeeee C-1
CELA a snes sass ons cosa cou nas oes cnn cones ents ans SOR MNSA Ss SARIS MU KOT HEH SONS SSIS Ge Mo eS Haas GHEE D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ ou. eecccccesnceeesseeecesaeeeessaeecesaeesensaeesesneeeeneas E-1
SRS sere ce asec crass sre ce ae eos es cece cet ese ee rs cece ct seme sees se aoe cee eae ws F-1

A-1 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_30.jpeg:
The radar range analog bar and RATR work as previously described.
RATR, in this case, would be for rounds arriving at the radar derived
target range.

The BMR cue is a dot dynamically positioned at the perimeter of the
50-mil reticle to indicate maximum effective bullet range based on type of
rounds loaded in the PACS and own ship/target maneuvering and
relationship. Like the range bar, a BMR dot at 3 o’clock would indicate a
maximum effective bullet range of 3000 feet, 4 o’clock, 4000 feet, etc.
Under certain engagement conditions, the bullet maximum range may
exceed 12,000 feet. In this case, the maximum range cue is limited to the
12 o'clock position.

The BMR cue indicates the range that corresponds to a bullet TOF of 1.5
seconds for the M-56 bullet or 2.5 seconds for the PGU-28 bullet, or an
impact velocity of 500 FPS, whichever produces the shortest range.
Maximum accurate firing range is attained when the range bar tab
decreases to the BMR cue range or less.

The TD box is removed when its center is within 25 mils of the pipper, and
target range is less than 3000 feet (or the maximum bullet range,
whichever is greater). It reappears when range increases to 3200 feet or
200 feet greater than maximum bullet range, or when the center of the
box is more than 37 mils from the pipper.

AAW-6 D - 24


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_31.jpeg:
GDS Funnel

When in GDS funnel, “FNL” is displayed in window 17 of the HUD
(Figure D-14).

5
35 36 01

A

AAW-06-14

Figure D - 14. GDS Funnel.

The GDS funnel gun aiming display is a combination of GDS reticle and
LCOS track funnel displays. The turn plane line is replaced with the
funnel. The GDS reticle represents one solution using the GDS algorithm
while the LCOS track funnel represents a second solution using the LCOS
algorithm.

D-25 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_32.jpeg:
GUN EMPLOYMENT

Select HIGH rate for greater bullet stream density and higher Px. At 100
rounds per second, this gives you roughly 5 seconds of continuous gun fire
time. In air-to-air combat, fire significant bursts (1-2 seconds) to increase
bullet count near the target. Remember, the period between trigger
release and gun full stop is slightly less than 1 second. During the
clearing cycle, the trigger is disabled and you must delay at least this long
between bursts.

Often, the largest errors result from firing at near maximum range. Long
range shots increase bullet TOF. It is relatively simple for the target to
change his POM, thereby flying himself away from the bullet stream.

Increased muzzle velocity and lower drag of the PGU-28 bullet increases
the bullet's effective range and maximum TOF. During A/A gunnery with
the PGU-28 bullet, the pilot will notice an increased maximum firing
range and a decreased lead angle requirement for a given target range
(over the M-56).

AAW-6 D - 26


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_33.jpeg:
Tracking Gun Shot-LCOS Search Display

With no radar lock-on, the LCOS search display (Figure D-15) may still be
used for a tracking shot if the pilot accurately estimates target range. The
width of the funnel may be used as an aid in estimating target range. The
funnel width at any given position equates to a target computation range
based on the apparent width of a 40-foot wingspan aircraft at that position
and computation range. If the pilot positions the 40-foot wingspan target
in the funnel at a position where the wingspan subtends the width of the
funnel (wall-to-wall), then the bullet stream should pass through the
target position as the stream moves away from the F-15E. Adjustments
in aiming with the funnel must be made when the wingspan is not 40 feet.

AAW-06-15

Figure D - 15. LCOS Search Display.

One way to approach the shot with the funnel is to pull the target from
the top of the funnel downward through the funnel until wingspan/funnel
width match occurs. Another way would be to place your nose well in lead
of the target and control the target movement into position from the
bottom of the funnel. This then has the target at the funnel calculated
range and position of the bullet stream. Firing should commence one
bullet TOF prior to arrival of the funnel/wingspan match, especially if the
target cannot be stabilized in a tracking position.

The three small pippers are for 1000, 2250 and 4000 feet calculated bullet
stream ranges. The RATR is calculated for a target range of 2250 feet
(1000 feet if stiffened) in this display.

D-27 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_34.jpeg:
Tracking Gun Shot-LCOS Track Display

With a radar lock-on, the LCOS pipper can be used as a tracking index
with good results if employed in the envelope it was designed for (aspect
45° or less/30 knots in closure/in target POM/G held constant, Figure
D-16). The funnel helps align the shot, but ultimately the pilot should
track the target with the pipper. If the pipper is on the target, the bullet
stream should pass through the target position. Since the pipper is being
positioned using radar range data, wingspan/funnel matching is not
required.

AAW-06-16

Figure D - 16. LCOS Track Display.

Realize though, that pipper on the target is not always an indicator of
bullets on the target. In a high aspect/closure situation the sight can
under lead enough to cause a miss (up to 50 mils at 90° aspect). If the
target is moving out-of-plane, then the pipper will be in lag until shooter
parameters stabilize and the sight “settles.” If G is increased to bring the
pipper to the target, the pipper depresses to indicate a need for more lead.
If you add more G to bring the pipper on target and fire at the same time,
the results after one TOF will be bullets behind the target.

AAW-6 D - 28


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_35.jpeg:
Tracking Gun Shot-GDS Display

The GDS pipper (Figure D-17) is very accurate and should be placed on
the target prior to trigger squeeze. Tracking the target for an extended
time (prior to trigger squeeze) is not required. Firing should occur inside
BMR cue range.

10

AAW-06-17

Figure D - 17. GDS Display.

D - 29 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_36.jpeg:
Tracking Gun Shot-GDS FNL Display

When using the GDS FNL display (Figure D-18), the funnel helps align
the shot, but the pipper should be placed on the target prior to trigger
squeeze. Again, extended tracking time is not required.

AAW-06-18

Figure D - 18. GDS FNL Display.

AAW-6 D - 30


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_37.jpeg:
Tracking Gun Shot-—GDS and GDS FNL Displays

Whether to take a tracking shot or snap shot depends on several factors.
These factors include energy state, threat environment, maneuvering
requirements, timing, etc. Tracking shots have a high Pk, but are time
and energy consuming and make the F-15E predictable. Snap shots
deplete less energy and allow for a quick separation if the attempt fails,
but they have a lower Pk. In either case, the shooter must recognize the
type of shot required and react quickly to optimize shot parameters.

The all aspect gun director sight takes approximately 1.5 seconds to
initialize following radar lock on (during that period the LCOS track
display is present). Pull enough lead to put the reticle ahead of the target
and use the turn plane line/funnel as an aid in establishing an in-plane
solution. The pipper should be allowed to move to the target at a
controllable rate. Begin firing when in range and maintain the pipper on
the target for as long as necessary. The RATR should appear and be
superimposed on the target one time of flight following trigger squeeze.

Snap Shot-GDS and GDS FNL Displays

The first priority is to establish adequate lead. More lead makes the
target closer at open fire range and decreases bullet TOF, but can limit
over-the-nose visibility. A slight out-of-plane pursuit course is acceptable
for maintaining tally. The turn plane line/funnel is an exceptional
reference for accomplishing both the slightly out of and in-plane
maneuvers. As range decreases and the target tracks forward, reposition
into his POM.

Your next concern is when to start firing on the bandit. An advantage of
the director mode is its direct indication of bullet miss distance. No sight
dampening is used and there is no inherent delay in miss distance
indications due to fighter maneuvering.

D-31 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_38.jpeg:
Reticle lag due to fighter maneuvering is nonexistent in the director mode.
However, there is some lag associated with target maneuvering. The lag
occurs during target jinking and is a result of the radar tracking filters.
Normally, within 2 seconds of the target ceasing its maneuvers, 90% of
the target's maneuvering influences are eliminated (assuming no sight
stiffening). This means that during aggressive jinking the sight may lag
as much as 2 seconds behind. Consideration should be given to this factor
when setting up for director mode snap shots.

Snap Shot-LCOS Search and Track Funnel Displays

The snap shot in the LCOS mode is accomplished in the same manner as
that mentioned earlier. The open fire point is determined by the track
rate of the funnel match/pipper and the bandit toward each other. If
parameters are held constant, fire the gun one TOF prior to funnel
match/pipper and target intersection (Figure D-19).

AAW-06-19

Figure D - 19. Snap Shot.

If it is necessary to slow LOS rate by increasing G, the pipper will depress
toward the target and be out of solution. To compensate, open fire earlier
than one TOF before pipper/target intercept. Cease fire once the pipper
passes through the target. Shooting past this point wastes ammunition
and delays any reposition/separation maneuver.

AAW-6 D - 32


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_39.jpeg:
SHOT CRITERIA

Table D-1 lists current F-15 shot criteria for the gun. This table was
obtained from AFTTP 3-1, Volume 1, Change 1, 17 Mar 98.

F- | maine] GUN

Radar Target Maximum | Maximum Range _| Minimum
of oh Shot Track Aspect Range

14 to | 1410 184A AA | torpor | DOT TOF DOT | Training Rules
dbs
Taos [wm | an | soe | som | pamemae

Kill Criteria (See gun shot assessment on next page)

RATR frames required on target aircraft “
15 frames (8mm)/30 frames (VTR)[J1/2 second total “?”

Remarks

1. Assessment tables assume 30 frames per second (FPS) for 8mm VTR and 60 FPS
for 3/4-inch VTR.

The center of the RATR must be touching the target to count as a frame. Each
video frame with the entire RATR superimposed on the aircraft and the center of
the RATR on the fuselage will count as two frames.

No-lock shots outside 2500 ft are unassessable. No-lock shots taken between
2500 ft and 1500 ft (reticle nonstiffened) with 25 valid frames (50 VTR) on the
target are valid for a kill. No-lock shots taken between 1500 ft and 500 ft (with
the reticle stiffened) with 20 valid frames (40 VTR) on the target are valid for a
kill.

Gun attempt is any trigger squeeze.

Valid gun shot is any gun attempt resulting in any frames with the center of the
RATR on the target.

Invalid gun shot is any gun attempt not resulting in any frames with the center
of the RATR on the target due to shooter parameters (plane, range, lead, etc.).

Defeated gun shot is any gun attempt not resulting in any frames with the
center of the RATR on the target due to target maneuvers (jinks, out-of-plane
pulls, rolling breaks, etc.).

Table D - 1. Gun Shot Criteria.

D - 33 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the major components of the M61A1 gun system and their
operational characteristics.

2. Identify the differences between 20mm rounds and how to program
these rounds.

3. Identify general characteristics of the F-15E gunsight.
4. Identify M61A1 gun employment techniques.

5. Identify the general characteristics of the combined mode.

REFERENCES
TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 Section I Gun Employment
Section IT Exterior Inspection (Gun), Gun
Attack
AFTTP 3-1 Vol IV Air-to-Air Weapons (Gun),

Weapons Selection/Fire doctrine
(20mm Gun Employment)

AAW-6 B-1


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_40.jpeg:
Gun Shot Assessment

The following paragraphs explain the methodology used to convert the
Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual (JMEM) 20 round requirement into
RATR frames on target for both 3/4-inch and 8mm VTR.

Assumptions

The F-15 gun alone has a bullet dispersion of less than 4 mils. This
means that at 1000 ft, 80 percent of the bullets fired will pass through a 4-
foot cone. The published dispersion criteria for the gun system is 8 mils.
This criteria takes into account other factors, including boresight error,
radar track latency, radar scintillation and other specific aircraft factors.
In effect, this means that a 4-mil grouping of bullets may be randomly
located anywhere within a 8 mil cone. By defining a valid RATR frame as
any frame when the center of the RATR is touching the aircraft, at any
one time up to 50 percent of the RATR may be off the aircraft, resulting in
an average of 40 percent of the bullets fired hitting the aircraft.

3/4-VTR or 8mm Assessment

To satisfy the JMEM 20 bullet requirement using the assumptions listed
above and a gun fire rate of 100 rounds per second, the center of the RATR
must be on the target for 3/4 of a second (100 bullets per second x 40
percent bullets on aircraft x 0.75 seconds = 20 bullets on aircraft). This
equates to 30 frames using 60 frame per second (fps) (3/4-inch VTR) or 15
frames using 30 (8mm). Obviously, if the entire RATR was superimposed
on the aircraft, it would take less frames to satisfy the JMEM
requirements (1/4 of a second or 15 frames [3/4-inch VTR], eight frames
[8mm]) because the probability of the number of bullets going through the
aircraft is increased. To acknowledge this fact, any frame where the
entire RATR is superimposed on the aircraft and the center of the RATR is
on the fuselage counts as two frames. This in effect reduces the number of
frames required by 50 percent while ensuring the bullet density is
centered around critical components of the aircraft and factors in the
increased survivability of four-generation aircraft to PGU rounds going
through the wings.

AAW-6 D - 34


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_41.jpeg:
FAILURES
Double Generator/Utility B Failure

Because the M61A1 is electrically controlled and hydraulically powered, a
double main generator or Utility B failure will disable the gun.

ADC/INS Failure

If inputs from either the ADC or INS become bad, the gunsight reverts to
the FNL backup mode. Total failure of the INS results in a fixed
depression gunsight. Mil depression angle must be entered in the UFC
and the sight becomes a fixed sight only.

PACS Failure

An armed gun will fire with the trigger. However, without the PACS, you
cannot change the firing rate or monitor and change the rounds count.
There will be no gun reticles on the HUD.

CC Failure
With CC failure, the gun cross is continuously displayed (if master arm

switch is in ARM), and becomes the sole aiming reference for gun shots
(Figure D-20).

AOL: — — — —«I10,

7 N
71,Y\\\

AAW-06-20

Figure D - 20. Gun CC Failure.

D- 35 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_42.jpeg:
COMBINED MODE
This mode allows a gunsight and gun to be used while a short range
missile (SRM) is selected. While in the combined mode, the A/A radar
display operates as ifin SRM. The gun mode symbology takes priority in
the HUD with some SRM information added. When the gun is fired, the
HUD reverts to primary gun mode symbology.
Combined Mode Entry
Combined mode is entered by selecting SRM on the weapon select switch
and then pulling up on the right multi-function (coolie) switch in the front
cockpit for more than 1 second. These requirements must be met:

e A/A master mode selected

e Pilot in command of the A/A radar

e SRM selected

e In any radar mode except TWS

e Bullets available for the gun
Exclusion of TWS assures there is not conflict with the coolie up selection.
Availability of SRMs is not a requirement to enter the combined mode.
While in the combined mode, up activation of the coolie switch for less
than 1 second cycles between GDS and GDS FNL availability.
Combined Mode Exit
Exit occurs when any of the following takes place:

¢ Coolie switch pulled up for longer than 1 second

e A/A master mode exited

e Weapon select switch is moved out of SRM

e Radar mode is changed to TWS

e The last bullet is fired and its time-of-flight has expired

e PACS to CC communication is lost

AAW-6 D - 36


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_43.jpeg:
HUD Displays in Combined Mode

The combined mode HUD displays include all the normal gun mode
displays plus the following limited SRM symbology:

e SRM Rmin LC, Rmin HC, Rmax HC and Rmax LC
e SRM shoot cue
e SRM uncage cue
e AIM-9M seeker head position circle
The following symbols are not displayed in the combined mode:
e Waterline
e ASE circle
e Steering dot
e SRM analog range bar
e AIM-9M FOV circle
e Break X
e No zone cue
e Target locator line
e Degrees off boresight

e Degrees before break-lock

D - 37 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_44.jpeg:
Type Gun Displays (Combined Mode)

The LCOS search funnel is displayed in radar search. Ifin radar STT,
stiffen provides an LCOS track funnel gunsight. In radar STT, not
stiffened, the GDS or GDS FNL displays are presented depending on
selection.

Stiffen (Combined Mode)
When the coolie switch is held down, both missile boresight and LCOS

track funnel gunsight are commanded (Figure D-21, assuming radar STT,
and the AIM-9M has not been previously uncaged).

S4M 510
830
2.2 9.0G

AAW-06-21

Figure D - 21. Combined, STT, Stiffen LCOS Selected, Boresight SRM.

AAW-6 D - 38


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_45.jpeg:
AIM-9M HUD Displays (Combined Mode)

During combined mode, the AIM-9M seeker circle is present on the HUD.
The AIM-9M FOV circle is not displayed. Consequently, there is no
indication of seeker SCAN mode selection. The SRM seeker circle does not
reflect the nutating status when SCAN is selected. In radar search, the
AIM-9M seeker circle is at the boresight position (Figure D-22).

AAW-06-22

Figure D - 22. Combined, Radar in Search.

D - 39 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_46.jpeg:
When the seeker circle is uncaged, special burst ranging (SBR) is
commanded. The range scale, target range caret and Vc are displayed
(Figure D-23). Data remains for 3 seconds. Additional SBRs can be
commanded by depressing the laser fire button in the front cockpit. Rmax
(LC/HC), Rmin (LC/HC) and the shoot cue are not displayed with SBR.

S4M 510
830
2.2 9.0G

AAW-06-23

Figure D - 23. Radar in Search, Uncaged SRM, SBR.

AAW-6 D - 40


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_47.jpeg:
With radar lock-on, when the AIM-9M LOS and the radar LOS are within
2°, Rmax (LC/HC) and Rmin (LC/HC) are displayed. If at the same time
the target is within shoot parameters, the shoot cue is displayed. The
shoot cue and the lock/shoot lights flash (Figure D-24). The TD box is also
displayed.

AAW-06-24

Figure D - 24. AIM-9M Shoot Cue.

D-41 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_48.jpeg:
The TD box is removed due to close proximity to the gunsight (Figure
D-25). However, if the TD box is removed, the shoot cue is displayed
flashing at the bottom or top of the seeker position circle. The off-missile
cue replaces round count at radar STT (Figure D-26). When the gun is
fired, round count replaces the off-missile cue until the trigger is released.

18.0 UNC
GDS
R 0.5
S4SEC
49

AAW-06-25

Figure D - 25. STT, Uncaged SRM, TD Box Occluded.

AAW-06-26

Figure D - 26. STT, Off-Missile, Uncaged SRM, Shoot Cue.

AAW-6 D - 42


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_49.jpeg:
Once the target moves inside Rmin LC, the break X is not displayed; SRM
symbology remains, but the shoot cue, and SRM count and type are removed.
No zone is also not displayed (Figure D-27).

AAW-06-27

Figure D - 27. STT, Inside SRM Minimum Range, Caged SRM, GDS.

D - 43 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz. Bring this workbook to class.

2. Read TO 1F-15E-34-1-1 and AFTTP 3-1, Vol IV, applicable
references.

3. Suggested reading: A review of the RDR-3 workbook.

4. Bring TO 1F-15E-34-1-1CL-1 (Dash 34 checklist) and this workbook
to class.

C-1 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_50.jpeg:
Gun HUD Displays in Combined Mode

Full up gun displays are present at all times in the combined mode. The
LCOS search funnel is displayed during SBR (Figure D-23). The SBR
data is not used for the any gunsight computations.

HUD Display During Trigger Activation

When the gun trigger is activated, first or second detent, the SRM shoot
cue and AIM-9M seeker head position circle are removed (Figure D-28).
Rmax (LC/HC), Rmin (LC/HC) and SRM count are displayed. Primary
support is given to gunsight symbology until trigger release or until all
gun rounds are expended. Rounds remaining are displayed in place of the
off missile cue. The off-missile cue will return at trigger release if
applicable.

The RATR appears and operates after one TOF, if the RATR is in the
HUD FOV.

When the trigger is released, SRM symbology is restored except for the
SRM shoot cue, which is not restored until after the last bullet TOF is
completed and the RATR is removed. If the last round is fired, the
combined mode is exited to SRM automatically at last round TOF and
RATR removal.

AAW-06-28

Figure D - 28. STT, Trigger Activated.

AAW-6 D - 44


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_51.jpeg:
A/A Radar Display (Combined Mode)

The shoot cue, Rmax (LC/HC) and Rmin (LC/HC) are displayed on the A/A
radar display under the same conditions as they are displayed on the
HUD. Table D-2 shows HUD window 5 displays during combined/SRM/
GUN operations.

HUD WINDOW 5 - COMBINED MODE

COM-
SYMBOLS | BINE | SRM | GUN
Cue

Rounds
Remaining

Rounds
Remaining

(1)

(1) XXX is displayed when the last round is fired, for the last bullet TOF, after which time the
combined mode is exited to SRM. Then the off-missile cue appears, or blank if no off-missiles
are available.

Table D - 2. Combined Mode HUD.

D- 45 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_52.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAW-6 D - 46


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_53.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The M61A1 is hydraulically driven by the system.
a. Utility A

b. Utility B

c. PC-1B

d. PC-2B

The RATR symbol should be used as the primary gun aiming device.

a. True
b. False

The funnel (LCOS algorithm) assumes

your aircraft is within 45° of the target’s tail.

fighter G equals target G.

target parameters will not change during bullet TOF.
All of the above.

ao op

In radar search, the LCOS search funnel width is based on a 40 foot
wingspan aircraft.

a. True
b. False

The bullet maximum range cue with PGU-28 loaded

fluctuates as flight parameters change.
is not present with CC failure.
indicates a bullet TOF of 2.5 seconds.
All of the above.

ae op

E-1 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_54.jpeg:
6. The radar range to the target aircraft in Figure F-1 below is roughly

a. 1000 feet.
b. 4000 feet.
C. 3000 feet.
d. 2000 feet.

AAW-06-29

Figure F - 1.
7. | Which of the following statements about the M-61 gun is (are) true?

a. Adouble main generator failure disables the gun.

b. The installed armament ground safety pin prevents firing
voltage from reaching the chambered rounds.

c. The hydraulic manual control handle must be stowed (flush) for
gun employment.

d. All of the above.

AAW-6 E-2


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_55.jpeg:
10.

In radar STT, with combined mode selected (SRM caged), holding the
coolie switch down in the front seat

only boresights the AIM-9M seeker circle.

stiffens the GDS sight.

commands a programming LCOS.

boresights the AIM-9M seeker circle and commands LCOS
track funnel.

Boop

The combined mode may be entered with SRM selected in all the
following radar modes except

a. standby.
b. — search.
c. STT.

d. TWS.

In the combined mode, special burst ranging target data is displayed
for seconds.

aon
com} e &

E-3 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_56.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAW-6 E-4


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_57.jpeg:
API

BMR

FNL

FRL

GDS

HEI

JEM

JMEM

LCOS

POM

RATR

SBR

SRM

STT

TOF

TP

GLOSSARY
Armor piercing incendiary
Bullet maximum range
Funnel
Fuselage reference line
Gun director sight
High explosive incendiary
Jet engine modulation
Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual
Lead computing optical sight
Plane of motion
Rounds at target range
Special burst ranging
Short range missile
Single target track
Time of flight
Target practice

Track-while-scan

AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_58.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAW-6 F-2


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

AAW-6 C-2


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
M61A1 GUN DESCRIPTION

The 20mm gun is an air cooled, six-barrel weapon capable of firing at
rates of 4000 or 6000 rounds per minute. The M61A1 has a rotary action
mechanism contained within a fixed rear housing assembly with six bolts,
a firing cam path, a clearing cam path and a rotating barrel cluster. The
gun is installed in the right wing root, and is canted up 2° from the
fuselage reference line (FRL). Dispersion is 8 mils.

The major components of the gun system are the gun, ammunition
container, conveyor assemblies, and the hydraulic power and gearbox
assemblies.

20MM INFORMATION/DESCRIPTION
20mm Ammunition

The components that make up a complete round are: a brass cartridge
case, an electric primer, propellant powder and the projectile (Figure D-1).
The projectile is fired when an electrical pulse is applied to the primer.
The resulting flame passes through a gas vent leading to the propellant
chamber and ignites the propellant. As the propellant burns, it forms a
gas that forces the projectile through the gun barrel. The muzzle velocity
for the M-56 bullet is 3300 FPS. The muzzle velocity for the PGU-28 is
3375 FPS.

The only significant difference between the types of ammunition is in the
projectile. Located at the rear of all projectiles is a band of soft metal that
sits in the grooves of the gun barrel. The grooves in the barrel are twisted
so that the projectile receives a rotating motion as it travels through and
leaves the gun barrel. This rotation is induced to provide stability in
flight and projectile arming (if appropriate). The soft band also serves to
prevent the propelling gas from escaping past the projectile.

D-1 AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_8.jpeg:
UNPAINTED
ALUMINUM} ‘

BLACK 20MM API
(RED) M53
LETTERING

ARMOR PIERCING INCENDIARY (API)

— Ts

TRACER PROJECTILE
(TYPICAL)

BLUE

20MM BALL
(WHITE) 4)
WHT NG M55

TARGET PRACTICE (TP)

FUZE POINT
DETONATING (PD)
_ BRASS
YELLOW <—
(BLACK)
LETTERING ——> \ 20MM HEI
M56A3
INCENDIARY
COMPOSITION
BASE COVE
PROPELLANT ELECTRIC
CASE VENT SEAL PRIMER M52A3B1

HIGH EXPLOSIVE INCENDIARY (HEI)

AAW-06-01

Figure D - 1. 20 mm Ammunition.

AAW-6


Text from AAW-6_Gun_page_9.jpeg:
TP (Ball)/TP-T (Tracer)

The M55A1 and M55A2 ball cartridge is used in practice firing and is
referred to as TP for target practice. The projectile is made of steel and is
hollow.

The M220 TP-T is the same round, but incorporates a tracer.

API

The M53 armor-piercing incendiary (API) is used against armored targets.
The projectile functions with a combined incendiary and penetration

effect. It is made of steel with an incendiary composition. The projectile
does not contain a fuze since the incendiary effect is initiated by impact.

D-3 AAW-6


