Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIRCRAFT GENERAL
ACG-9
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES &
ABNORMAL OPERATIONS

NOVEMBER 1998

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_10.jpeg:
Abnormal Engine Start

For this discussion, abnormal engine starts (-220 engines) include:
e = engine fails to start,

e = engine fails to accelerate normally,

e hot starts, and

e auto acceleration.

Engine light off normally occurs within about five or six seconds after rpm
reaches 26%-30%. If no light off occurs within 30 seconds (from throttle
movement from off), shut the throttle off. If you wish to try another start,
allow the engine to windmill for 10 seconds to dry out any fuel that was
sent to the engine during the initial starting process. Then bring the
throttle back to idle when you are ready to try again. If you elect not to
try another start then leave the throttle in OFF, position the engine
master switch to OFF, and shut the JFS off.

If, during the engine start sequence (after light off) both rpm and FTIT
stop increasing, abandon the start and shut off the throttle, master
switch, and JFS switch. Complete the shutdown procedure.

If it appears that you are going to get a hot start (i.e., FTIT is going to
exceed 680° C), shut the throttle off. If 680° C was exceeded, allow the
engine to windmill to help cooling (this may require restarting the JFS
and/or reengaging the JFS to the engine). Then turn off the master
switch and the JFS. Once again, you are through for the day with this
aircraft. If, however, 680° C was not exceeded (you recognized the
impending hot start and took appropriate action), you can try another
start. Shut the throttle off and let the JFS windmill the engine until the
FTIT is below 200° C (remember, that is the lowest you can read on the
EMD, so once you see 200° C wait 10 more seconds before you attempt
another start). Change the air source knob over to the engine you are
going to start (to shut off bleed air from the other engine) and bring the
throttle back over to IDLE. Once the engine is running, remember to
switch the air source knob back to the BOTH position. If you do not select
BOTH on the air source knob, ECS air is cut off from one engine. Cool air
to the avionics and cockpit may be affected. ECS/DISP FLO LO lights will
illuminate if the airflow is insufficient to cool the avionics. The crew chief
will notice the loss of air flow from one engine during the ECS check
following second engine start.

ACG-9 D-4


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_11.jpeg:
If auto acceleration occurs during the start (i.e., the motor keeps
accelerating on its own above idle rpm with the throttle in idle), shut the
engine down immediately—throttle, fire light, master switch, JFS switch.
The engine nozzle may be closed down and the added thrust may cause
the aircraft to jump the chocks. On a crowded ramp, this can get real
exciting!

AMAD or Engine Fire During Start

The immediate concern here is to get the fire put out as quickly as
possible. Although the steps are slightly different (AMAD FIRE =
button/bottle/throttle; ENGINE FIRE = button/throttle/bottle) the intent
is to shut off the source of fuel. When you discharge the fire extinguisher
for the AMAD fire, you automatically shut down the JFS. For an engine
fire, push the fire light button to shut off the source of engine fuel at the
airframe and then shut down the throttle, discharge the extinguisher and
lastly, shut off the master switch and JFS switch. If you have either of
these fires, depending on severity, you may want to emergency ground
egress.

GROUND OPERATIONS
ECS Caution

An ECS problem on start may be indicated by a DISPL FLO LO caution
light. A quick, simple fix may be to just start the second engine and check
for absence of both the DISPL FLO LO caution and the MPD/MPCD ECS
caution. If there is a delay starting the second engine, advancing the right
engine to 73% (definitely below 78%) may solve the problem. Ensure that
AUTO is selected on the temperature control switch and that BOTH is
selected on the air source knob. If the ECS caution remains on for one
minute after both engines are running, we can cycle the air source knob
(L, R, BOTH) while the crew chief checks the air flow at each position. Set
the rpm of the operating side at 77% rpm and cycle the nonoperating side
idle to 78% rpm, while simultaneously cycling the air source knob (L, R,
BOTH). If, after 10 minutes, the ECS caution remains on, abort the
mission. Do not taxi out of the chocks with an ECS problem.

D-5 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_12.jpeg:
If the ECS caution comes on while taxiing, attempt the previously
described procedure. If it does not extinguish, shut down an engine to
induce automatic avionics shutdown. If automatic avionics shutdown does
not occur, manually turn off as much equipment as possible and shut
down the aircraft as soon as practical (including arming/quick check
area—vice taxiing back to parking). If shutting down in quick check area,
ensure wheels are chocked as you will lose braking capability.

Loss of Brakes

It is important to remember that very little deceleration will be sensed at
speeds above 100 knots, regardless of antiskid system status. At high
speed, if loss of brakes is determined, consider the option of a cable
engagement and lower the hook early and avoid the rush. In addition to
lowering the hook, attempt to reduce your speed by releasing the brakes,
turning the antiskid to PULSER, and reapplying the brakes. Ifa cable is
not practical/available, release the brakes, turn the antiskid switch to
PULSER, and reapply the brakes. The pulsating braking action reduces
the probability of blown tires from locked wheels but also prevents
bringing the aircraft to a complete stop. Therefore, once slowed to taxi
speed, turn the antiskid switch to OFF. If the antiskid was not the source
of the problem and braking is not restored, or if stopping distance is
critical, release the brakes and pull the emergency brake/steering handle.
Depress the paddle switch to ensure crossover to JFS accumulator
pressure. Smoothly and steadily reapply the brakes, keeping in mind that
the emergency system bypasses the antiskid/pulser system and increases
the possibility of blown tires. If you are taxiing the aircraft on a congested
ramp and lose braking, the immediate problem is to stop the aircraft. Pull
the emergency brake/steer handle! Remember, whenever you change the
brake system, (antiskid switch or emer brake/steer handle) release pedal
pressure before accomplishing the changeover.

If the aircraft is going to depart the prepared surface, shut down the
engines to limit the damage to the engines.

ACG-9 D-6


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_13.jpeg:
TAKEOFF
Abort

The abort decision is influenced by many variables which are often
relevant in any takeoff situation. These factors include (but are not
limited to) runway remaining, arresting gear availability, weather,
aircraft weight and speed, and nature of the emergency. They should be
considered before ever stepping to the aircraft. A catastrophic engine
failure at nosewheel rotation in a 70,000 pound aircraft, on a wet runway
with ceiling and visibility at 300 feet and one mile, is not the time to be
agonizing over whether to continue the takeoff or stay on the ground.

Once you decide to abort, chop the throttles to IDLE and apply the brakes.
If stopping distance is critical, begin maximum antiskid braking. Use as
much pedal force as possible (not just enough to get antiskid cycling). If
aborting with a blown main tire, select PULSER. Pulser prevents
continuous loss of brake pressure due to skid sensing on the blown tire
and allows braking on the good tire. If both mains are blown, be ready to
counter any skid with timely nose gear steering inputs in the direction of
the skid. Maneuvering mode (nose gear steering button depressed) may
be needed for adequate control. In either case, do not jeopardize your
ability to maintain directional control. Anticipate a barrier engagement;
lower the hook early and engage as close to center as possible without
brakes applied.

WARNING

Fuel draining overboard after engine
shutdown can contact a hot wheel and
cause a fire. Engine shutdown before
arrival of firefighting equipment should
be avoided where hot brakes exist.

D-7 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_14.jpeg:
Tire Failure During Takeoff

A blown tire during the takeoff roll is very difficult to recognize from the
cockpit. Your only indication may be a call from the tower or a trailing
wingman. If you get airborne, do not retract the gear or flaps. Keep the
airspeed under 250 knots, if practical, to prevent automatic flap
retraction. The interval between takeoff and landing should be mostly
routine; i.e., burn down fuel to land as soon as practical. Have a chase or
the tower check over the aircraft, just in case. While the runway is being
cleared of any debris, begin burning down/dumping fuel to a reasonable
landing weight. Review the landing with blown tires procedure in the
checklist. With the landing gear handle down, neither the internal nor
external fuel tanks pressurize. In this condition the internal tanks
transfer normally but the external tanks do not transfer until the FUEL
LOW light illuminates. External fuel does not dump normally with the
gear handle down. There is a procedure (in Chapter 3 of the Dash 1 and
the Dash 1 checklist) for transferring/dumping external fuel with the
landing gear down. If the situation is warranted, you could use this
procedure to dump/burn external fuel and achieve desired landing weight
faster. Maneuver conservatively once PULSER is selected since the ARI
is disengaged with PULSER selected and gear down.

External Stores Jettison

External stores may be jettisoned by either the selective or emergency
jettison systems. Selective jettison is provided with the selective jettison
knob in conjunction with the MPD/MPCD display. COMBAT, A/A, and
A/G selective jettison mechanization are covered in detail in later lessons
or you can refer to TO 1F-15E-1, Section I, Stores Jettison System, for
additional information.

Although selective jettison is not available until the gear handle is up,
emergency jettison is possible; i.e., the button is hot, whenever electrical
power is on the aircraft. When pressed, this sequentially jettisons all
carted pylons on stations 2, 5, and 8, as well as all CFT stores (air-to-air
or air-to-ground). Regardless of the master arm switch position, all
arming solenoids are automatically deenergized before jettison and all
stores are jettisoned unarmed. When airborne there is a possibility of
missile/store collision with the aircraft. If possible, use selective jettison
when airborne (either COMBAT JETTISON or A/G SELECTIVE
JETTISON) to jettison CFT A/G stores first, then wing station stores/
pylons. Ground jettison carries a high probability of collision between
stores/pylons and the landing gear. Therefore, do not use emergency
jettison on the ground, or with both CFT and pylon stores, except as a last
resort or in an extreme emergency.

ACG-9 D-8


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_15.jpeg:
Engine Fire on Takeoff

Engine fire indications are the illumination of the fire warning light and
the voice warning system; i.e., “WARNING, ENGINE FIRE, RIGHT.” If
the decision is made to abort the takeoff, handle the abort. Once the
aircraft is under control, push the illuminated fire warning light. Ifthe
light remains on, then shut down the engine and discharge the
extinguisher. Based on the condition of the fire, coordinate with the
emergency crew prior to shutdown, then egress.

If the takeoff is continued, climb to a safe altitude (2000' AGL) and handle
as an engine fire in flight.

IN FLIGHT
Engine Fire In Flight

Reduce the power to IDLE on the affected engine. If the light remains on,
push the fire warning light. This will shut down the engine by closing the
airframe mounted fuel shutoff valve. Move the throttle to OFF and
discharge the extinguisher. If the light goes out, check the fire warning
system to confirm that the system is still operational. If the extinguisher
is discharged, do not restart the engine unless absolutely necessary. If the
fire persists, ejection is recommended.

Engine Fails to Respond to Throttle Commands

Landing with an engine that is stuck above IDLE may produce
unacceptably high airspeeds for approach and excessive landing rollout
distances. If the excessive thrust is not controllable, engine shutdown
may be required to properly control landing speeds and landing distances.
Attempt to configure for landing prior to engine shutdown. Restarting an
engine that has had a stuck throttle, and required the use of the fire
button to shut it down, will probably result in a hot start. The use of high
G turns and the speedbrake should be sufficient to control airspeed in
order to configure for landing.

D-9 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_16.jpeg:
If the throttle will not shut down the engine, depressing the fire button
should shut off the fuel flow and shut down the engine. You may
experience pops, fireballs, and FTIT overtemp as residual fuel passes
through the engine fuel control.

Be prepared to transition to single engine operation as you shut down the
engine. The loss of the hydraulics on the affected side will cause the CAS
to fall off. Reset them. If you accelerate to 300-350 knots, the hydraulic
pumps may be operational again due to windmill rpm. The CAS will fall
off as you decelerate. Reset them. If you shut down the engine on final,
the loss of the CAS may impact handling qualities in the landing zone.
Shutting down the engine prior to glide slope intercept is sufficient to
stabilize the aircraft before you approach the runway.

Single Engine Stall/Stagnations

Engine stalls normally produce an audible pop, bang, or thud, but may
occur without audible warning. For severe stalls at MIL or above, rpm
rollback, increased FTIT and nozzle opening may be noted. Stalls are
usually self-clearing, but reducing the throttle to MIL for AB stalls and
IDLE for non-AB stalls will aid in recovery of the engine. If the stall does
not clear, the engine must be shut down and restarted.

Stagnations are characterized by rising FTIT and decreasing rpm (throttle
not moved). FTIT overtemp will damage the engine. Without audible
stall warnings and without accompanying fire plume due to the
stagnations, the first indication of a stagnation may be the generators
dropping off the line.

For a single engine stall/stagnation, reduce the throttle to MIL/IDLE and
confirm the engine heat is OFF. If the rpm continues to decrease below
IDLE and the engine does not respond to throttle commands, shut down
the engine and perform a restart. If the FTIT exceeded 1000° C, leave the
engine at IDLE.

ACG-9 D-10


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_17.jpeg:
Double Engine Stall/Stagnation/Failure

Double engine flameout can be caused by failure of all boost pumps, empty
feed tanks, or mechanical failure of both engines. If both engines fail,
lower the nose to maintain 350 knots. It is critical to keep at least one
engine at a rpm that will provide hydraulics for the flight controls and
emergency generator. At 350 knots the engine will windmill at 12%. If
both engines stagnate, leave one engine stagnated while restarting the
other engine. The stagnated engine will provide the necessary hydraulics.
Once the first engine indicates a restart, shut down and restart the second
one to minimize the damage due to the FTIT overtemp.

Restarts

Spooldown airstarts are the preferred method to restart the engines in
that a spooldown airstart is faster than using the JFS. After shutting
down the engine, move the throttle to midrange as the rpm decreases
through 30-50% and the FTIT is below 800° C. If the rpm is allowed to
drop below 12%, engine fuel flow/ignition may not be available. Airspeeds
below 250 knots (primary mode) and 275 knots (secondary mode) may
produce hot starts. If the rpm drops below 12%, 450 knots may be
required to regain 12%. If accelerating to 450 knots is not feasible, JFS
restart should be utilized.

JFS restarts are very similar to ground starts. Adhere to the rpm limits
for starting the JFS and for engaging the JFS to the engine. Restart
envelope for using the JFS is below 20,000 feet and below 450 knots.
Airspeed for a JFS airstart can be as slow as 200 knots if dive angle and
altitude are critical. Restarts below 200 knots are not recommended due
to possible engine hot start.

Extreme Cockpit Temperatures

If cockpit temperatures cannot be maintained in AUTO, switch to
MANUAL and adjust the cabin temperature control knob. If the
temperature is still unacceptable, pull the emergency vent handle (below
FL 180). This allows ram air to enter the cockpit as a function of handle
extension. If temperature is hot at low altitude, consider climbing to
cooler air and/or decelerating. Optimum ram air cooling is obtained at
400 knots and 15,000 feet.

D-11 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_18.jpeg:
Smoke And Fumes

Smoke or fumes from the engine or residual oil in the ECS ducts can enter
the cockpit via the air conditioning system. This blue grey smoke has a
pungent odor and may sting the eyes. It may be noticed during run-up or
takeoff roll. An electrical malfunction, on the other hand, or overheated
cockpit equipment, may generate white or grey smoke, but should not
cause an open cockpit fire since these avionics use little electrical current.
Additionally, there are no fuel or hydraulic lines near the cockpit, so the
possibility of a cockpit fire is remote. All unidentified odors should be
considered toxic. Select 100% and EMERGENCY on the oxygen
regulators. Positive pressure prevents smoke and fumes from entering
even a leaky mask. Do not use the bailout bottle since it will vent into the
aircraft system unless the oxygen supply hose is disconnected. This would
allow smoke and fumes to enter the mask. If required, turn and pull the
emergency vent handle (below FL 180). If electrical smoke is confirmed,
turn off all your nonessential avionics and head for home. Consider
jettisoning the canopy if visibility becomes a problem, but realize this may
cause an eruption of flames. If none of these actions suffice, switch the
emergency generator to MAN and confirm emergency boost pump
operation (BST SYS MAL off and EMER BST ON illuminated). Turn off
both main generators. If the fire persists, place the emergency generator
in ISOLATE. This limits the generator to powering the emergency boost
pump, the engine monitor indicator, tail hook, and slipway door. If, after
reducing electrical load to this point, the fire becomes intolerable, eject. If
a fire is the reason for ejection, the WSO should make sure the command
selector valve is rotated to the AFT-INITIATE position. This will ensure
that the pilot is ejected even if incapacitated due to wind rush fanning the
fire.

Fuel Transfer Failures

The aircrew may be alerted to fuel transfer problems by one or more of the
following:

e premature BINGO caution (fuel transfer problem with external tanks
and/or CFTs),

e FUEL LOW warning with fuel remaining in tanks other than the
feed tanks,

e abnormal fuel quantity gauge indications during fuel checks,
e XFER pump caution, and

e heavy wing (external wing tank transfer problem—this clue will likely
be masked by the AFCS).

ACG-9 D-12


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_19.jpeg:
The exact sequence of aircrew actions may be influenced by the
seriousness of the resulting fuel state. If fuel available is critical, get the
aircraft pointed toward a suitable landing field and declare minimum or
emergency fuel, as the situation dictates. Both the Inflight Guide and the
Dash 1 checklist provide guidance for recovery utilizing a minimum fuel
profile. Use the fuel gauge to determine where the nontransferring fuel is
located.

Considering fuel available versus that required and possible fuel
imbalances may lead the aircrew to select stop transfer on the CFT's or
external tanks to prevent exacerbating a lateral imbalance. Large lateral
imbalances (one full/one empty external wing tank) dictate an 18 unit
AOA final. Other fuel imbalances (forward CG with Tank 1 transfer
failure/aft CG with external tank transfer failure) may require careful
maneuvering/controllability checks/18 units AOA finals considering the
external stores load or if AFCS problems occur in conjunction with
trapped fuel. In such circumstances, jettison of external tanks/stores
should be considered.

Restoring transfer of trapped fuel is the usual alternative. Cycle fuel
transfer switches—physically move them. Remember the landing gear
handle down depressurizes the external tanks (prevents transfer) as does
an open slipway switch. The slipway switch in the open position also
interrupts transfer of Tank 1 fuel, CFT fuel, and external tank fuel.

Do not depend on trapped fuel gravity transferring to the feed tanks.
Gravity transfer may not commence until very low fuel states (600-800
pounds total) in the feed tanks. And remember, gravity transfer only
transfers fuel at 3500 pph, or less.

If fuel is your overwhelming consideration, trapped CFT fuel can be
transferred by the CFT emergency transfer switch with both generators
off. Select MANUAL on the emergency generator switch and confirm the
emergency boost pump is on (EMER BST) and operating off the
emergency generator (no BST SYST MAL) before turning off the main
generators (and the left/right main boost pumps).

Although the fuel system is user friendly, there is no substitute for

discipline and comprehensive fuel checks for early identification/resolution
of fuel transfer problems.

D-13 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: ACG-9, July, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_20.jpeg:
In-Flight Canopy Loss

The most immediate concern is injury to the rear seater. Rapidly
reduce airspeed below 200 knots and descend. The back seater should
lower the seat full down, grasp the lower instrument panel and lean
forward, while trying to retain his helmet/mask. If necessary, select
COLD MIC to reduce noise interference with the pilot’s radio. Land
as soon as practical.

Double Generator Failure

First indications of a double generator failure are the loss of all cockpit
displays with the landing gear light and landing gear warning tone on.
The front cockpit MPCD will display an EADI after a few seconds.

The landing gear light/tone comes on as a result of ADC failure. As
long as the emergency generator and emergency boost pump are
operating, the aircraft can be safely recovered. INS will continue to
function and can be used for navigation purposes. The UFC is still
useable and allows for data entry of steer point coordinates. Steering
information is presented on the ADI.

Hydraulic Failures

Loss of a single hydraulic system is not considered a critical item due
to redundancy in system design. Refer to the hydraulic flow diagram
for systems affected with the loss of a single/dual system. Loss of UTL
A or total utility failure requires emergency gear lowering and an
approach-end arrestment is recommended. Loss of UTL A plus PC2A
loss also requires a controllability check. With multiple checklists to
accomplish, time must be managed to ensure all steps are performed.
Be careful not to mix the checklists. For example, for UTL A and
approach-end arrestment, do not pull emergency brake/steer handle
after the nosewheel is on the ground. Take the cable with feet off the
brakes, control the rollback with power and then use the emergency
brake/steer to stop forward motion. If you were to pull emergency
brake/steer after the nosewheel is on the ground, the airspeed is still
well above 100 knots and the tires would probably blow.

ACG-9 D-14


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_21.jpeg:
LANDING
Landing Gear Emergency Extension

Pulling the emergency landing gear handle bypasses the normal electrical
and hydraulic controls and ports JFS accumulator pressure to open the
gear doors and unlock the gear. The gear, aided by air loads, then free-fall
to down and locked. If there is UTL A pressure, resetting the handle (with
the normal gear handle down) will restore hydraulic pressure to the
extend side of the gear actuator and close the landing gear doors.
Resetting the handle also allows UTL B to recharge the JFS

accumulators.

Pulling the handle does not blow the gear down. If all gear will not extend
with the normal and emergency handle, the remaining gear can be
retracted with no adverse effects on the hydraulic system (UTL A
available).

During a UTLA or total UTL failure, the emergency system will allow for
gear lowering. The gear doors will remain open without UTL A to close
them.

Controllability Check

If the aircraft has been structurally damaged, or if there is a reason to
suspect poor handling characteristics during the recovery/landing, perform
a controllability check. Climb to a safe altitude and reduce weight to
minimum practical. Once en route home, slow down and configure for
landing. When the gear is down, leave it down; do not configure so far out
that you do not have enough fuel to recover. If you suspect wing damage,
do not lower the flaps. Slow to an AOA/speed that allows acceptable
handling characteristics, but no less than on-speed (20-22 units). If the
aircraft is recoverable, maintain landing configuration and fly a
straight-in no slower than the previously established AOA. Delay
reducing power until well into the flare. Power changes require
corresponding control changes and should be minimized in an aircraft
with questionable handling qualities.

D-15 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_22.jpeg:
Landing With Abnormal Gear Configuration

Prior to landing, consider fuel state, type of gear emergency, arresting
gear limitations, availability of backup gear, runway condition and length,
crosswinds, and other weather factors. If the conditions are not favorable,
eject. If conditions favor landing, refer to the specific gear configurations
listed in the checklist. Empty drop tanks make good skid pads, so retain
them. Depressurize them by opening the slipway, or, if the fuel low light
is on, by turning the air source knob to OFF. Consider jettisoning
armament. Lower flaps and fly an 18 unit AOA flat approach to runway
centerline. Fuel becomes a critical factor if weather complications or other
factors force you to divert to a suitable alternate in an already configured
aircraft. If a go-around (following a missed cable) is not possible, place the
antiskid switch to PULSER to restore braking on an extended main. This
braking, along with nose gear steering, may help in maintaining
directional control.

Approach-End Arrestment

Anticipate a missed engagement and have a backup plan. Reduce your
landing weight, lower the tail hook and lock the inertia reels. Touch down
on centerline 800-1200 feet prior to the cable to allow enough time to
lower the nosewheel before engagement. Once the nosewheel is on the
ground, neutralize the control stick to prevent the cable from damaging a
deflected stabilator.

WARNING

Above 35,000 pounds, an arrestment with
the nosewheel in the air may result in
nose gear failure and extensive aircraft
damage.

ACG-9 D-16


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_23.jpeg:
Check throttles at IDLE and brakes off prior to engagement. (Once on the
ground consider moving your hand from the throttles to prevent pushing
the power up during the engagement). Dash 1 maximum engagement
speeds are predicated on idle thrust. Control rollback with power and
wait for ground crew instructions. Do not jam on the brakes if the aircraft
is rolling backwards, since you can tip it on its tails—use power to stop
any rollback. Have a missed cable plan for going around or remaining on
the ground.

Departure-End Arrestment

Lower the hook at least 2000 feet prior to the cable if it appears there is
not enough runway available to safely stop the aircraft. Reduce speed as
much as possible before engagement, but do not brake or turn during the
arrestment. Stopping short of the cable and having to raise the hook is
much better than rolling over the cable with the hook up and then
departing the prepared surface. Control rollback with power.

Blown Tires

The antiskid system releases brake pressure due to skid sensing on a
blown tire. For effective braking action with a blown tire, select PULSER
(refer to the blown tires considerations in the ABORT discussion). If
airborne with a blown tire, remember that the ARI is disconnected with
gear down and PULSER selected, so maneuver conservatively. An
approach-end arrestment is recommended to avoid possible
braking/directional control problems. Fly final on-speed (20-22 units).
When circumstances dictate a heavyweight landing, delay reducing power
until well into the flare to prevent an excessive sink rate. If the nose tire
is blown, the engines may be damaged by rubber ingestion. Therefore, it
is doubly important that the engines are at IDLE at nosewheel
touchdown.

If the cable is missed/not available, (or if the tire is blown after landing)
use aileron to help maintain a wings level attitude and relieve some of the
load on a blown main tire. Use the pulser system to slow the aircraft from
landing speed to taxi speed. Brake pressure relief appears to increase in
intensity as speed decreases even though the pulser cycle rate is constant.
Stop straight ahead if possible (antiskid switch - OFF) and shut down
when fire equipment is available. If stopping distance is a problem, lower
the hook for a midfield or departure-end arrestment.

D-17 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_24.jpeg:
Dive Recovery

If altitude loss is not a factor, any amount of aft stick, airspeed and G
loading that does not overstress the aircraft can be used to pull out of a
dive. However, if you need to minimize the amount of altitude loss during
a dive recovery, then it becomes necessary to control airspeed and power.

As airspeed increases above corner velocity, the amount of room (turn
radius) required to complete the turn also increases. For instance, at 500
KCAS (idle power) using 6 Gs, it takes 4700 feet to recover to level flight
from a 60° nose low condition. However, the same recovery only takes
about half that amount, 3000 feet at 350 KCAS (idle power) and 6 Gs. It
makes sense that if you want to minimize altitude loss, make the pullout
at corner velocity, adding or reducing power as required. Corner velocity
depends on aircraft weight. In our training configuration, it is about 350
KCAS at sea level.

G loading is also a variable in the turning performance equation. Fora
given airspeed, as G is increased, turning radius is decreased. So altitude
loss can also be minimized by pulling more Gs, up to a point. Do not use
full aft stick and 12 Gs to recover from a dive unless the ground is coming
up real quick. You will bend the aircraft. To recover from a 60° dive at
500 knots using 10.3 Gs at IDLE power requires 2900 feet. Recovery from
a 60° dive at 350 knots, AB and full aft stick requires 1900 feet. Also, be
aware of your gross weight. Heavier aircraft feel and fly differently and
you may not have as much G available.

Another consideration to minimize altitude loss during the dive recovery is
awareness of your lift vector. Any amount of bank reduces the vertical
component of lift available and thus requires more turning room to
complete the recovery. Roll wings level for your pullout to minimize
altitude loss.

One of the least obvious (but most important) factors during a dive
recovery is being able to recognize the need for one. In most cases, your
impending dive recovery will probably be accompanied by some spatial
disorientation. (Why else would you be concerned with a dive recovery?)
Be aware that you must quickly recognize your situation and attitude, and
act promptly to prevent excessive altitude loss.

ACG-9 D-18


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_25.jpeg:
One last point—if everything else fails, know and adhere to your minimum
bailout altitudes! If you are already at low altitude and slow, it may be
necessary to add power (afterburner) to provide maximum G. In
summary, to minimize altitude loss during a dive recovery,

e know your attitude and altitude;

e control airspeed and power. Corner velocity provides the quickest,
tightest pullout (about 350 knots, CFTs and training stores);

e control G loading;
e consider gross weight;
e control your lift vector for a wings level pullout;

e be aware that spatial disorientation may slow your reflexes and add
to your altitude loss; and

e know and adhere to bailout altitudes.

D-19 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_26.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-9 D - 20


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_27.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

When encountering any emergency/abnormal situation what is your
number one priority?

Boop

Land as soon as possible.

Maintain aircraft control.

Talk to ATC agencies.

Analyze the situation and take the appropriate action.

After shutting an engine down on the ground due to an ECS caution,
what step must be taken to activate automatic avionics shutdown?

a.

Increase rpm on the other engine.

Turn and pull the emergency vent handle.

No additional step required to activate automatic avionics
shutdown.

Turn off the air source knob.

If your brakes fail while taxiing in a congested area, how do you stop
your aircraft?

no op

Turn the antiskid switch off.

Place the antiskid switch to PULSER and pump the brakes.
Depress the paddle switch.

Pull the emergency brake/steering handle and press the brake
pedals, while holding the paddle switch depressed.

What should you do after a successful high speed abort?

ao op

Taxi to parking.

Taxi clear of the runway, shut down, and await a tow.
Keep engines running and wait for the fire department.
Perform an emergency ground egress.

E-1 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_28.jpeg:
5. Upon notification of a fuel transfer problem (voice warning-
WARNING, TRANSFER PUMP, and display caution - XFER PUMP),
your first action should be:

a. Cycle the in-flight refueling switch.

b. Determine whether a CFT or internal wing transfer pump

transfer has failed.

Turn the ECS off to depressurize the fuel system.

d. Determine if the warning is caused by a Tank 1 transfer
problem.

°

6. What should you do if, after turning off all nonessential avionics,
electrical smoke persists?

a. Disconnect the oxygen supply hose and activate the bailout
bottle.
Adjust the oxygen regulator to NORMAL/NORMAL.

c. Turn both main generators off after emergency boost pump
operation is confirmed (by selecting EMER GEN - MANUAL).

d. Cycle the left generator.

7. What action should you take to provide effective braking action when
landing with a blown main tire?

Turn the antiskid switch off at main wheel spin up.

Select PULSER before landing.

Ensure antiskid system in NORM.

Pull the emergency brake/steering handle prior to touchdown.

ae oe

8. Which of the following actions is most important during a dive
recovery if altitude loss is a consideration?

a. Select afterburner, unless at low altitude.

b. Use bank angle above wings level to increase coefficient of lift.
c. Control airspeed, power, G and lift vector.

ACG-9 E-2


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_29.jpeg:
10.

For an approach-end arrestment, touchdown on centerline at least
feet prior to the cable to allow enough time to lower the
nosewheel before engagement.

a. 100
b. 800
c. 1500
d. 2000

If you lose the canopy in flight, why must you rapidly slow below 200
knots?

a. So that disturbed airflow over the cockpit does not stall the
vertical tails.

b. To enable intercockpit communication and reduce wind effects

on the WSO.

To reduce wind noise and allow air-to-ground communications.

d. To allow you to fly heads up and maintain visual separation for
your landing.

a

E-3 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_3.jpeg:
AIRCRAFT GENERAL

COVER

EMERGENCY PROCEDURES & ABNORMAL OPERATIONS

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is designed to review emergency procedures and abnormal
situations (generally in a flight mission chronological order). It provides
knowledge needed to safely operate the F-15E aircraft.

CONTENTS:

Ie EDO USGI exe ce ase ees ese sesame ses se aoe: ces seam Ses ee an cee: ator se ese ao so A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)..........0.eeeeseeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TERT wr sees sas ces cas wa one sane ws wats we sus eas ates as ee ant eas eS amt ae Ua nt OS aa ale Ma 8 D-1
END OF TEXT QUIZ... eecccessneecesneeeessaeecssaeeceesaeesesaeessseeeeeaees E-1
CS OIBIS AY cess ans sane anus aesn ssn news canis ave aise Sue MOR mS EMG NSS Mate MG GS ENG Mens ER A F-1

A-1 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_30.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-9 E-4


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_31.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

A/G Air-to-ground

A/A Air-to-air

AFCS Automatic flight control system
AGL Above ground level

AMAD Airframe mounted accessory drive
AOA Angle of attack

ARI Aileron rudder interconnect

C Celsius

CFT Conformal fuel tank

CG Center of gravity; ground speed
ECS Environmental control system
EMD Engine monitor display

FL Flight level

FTIT Fan inlet turbine temperature
JFS Jet fuel starter

KCAS Calibrated airspeed in knots

L Left

MPCD Multipurpose color display
MPD Multipurpose display
MSOGS Molecular sieve oxygen generating system

pph Pounds per hour

F-1 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_32.jpeg:
rpm
SOF

WSO

ACG-9

Right
Revolutions per minute
Supervisor of flying

Weapons system officer


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_33.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

F-3 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_34.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Given a scenario of abnormal cockpit indications, determine what
malfunction exists and, with the aid of an F-15E-1 checklist, perform
the required actions.

NOTE
This CRO will be tested in the simulator.

2. Given a malfunction or abnormal situation and external conditions,
select the best course of action.

3. Identify the logic behind recommended corrective actions for selected
malfunctions/abnormal conditions.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1 Section I Nose Gear Steering System,

Brake System, Stores
Jettison, Arresting Hook

System
Section HI All
Section VII Landing, Hydroplaning

TO 1F-15E-1CL-1

ACG-9 B-1


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS

BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

2. Read references in Sections I, III, and VII of TO 1F-15E-1.

3. Become familiar with the EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AND
ABNORMAL OPERATIONS section of TO 1F-15E-1CL-1.

4. Bring TO 1F-15E-1, TO 1F-15E-1CL-1, and 4th Wing Inflight Guide
to class.

C-1 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-9 C-2


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
BASIC RULES AND PHILOSOPHY

This presentation of emergencies and abnormal operations parallels the
chronological sequence of a flight. The text includes discussions of
malfunctions with emphasis on the logic behind recommended corrective
actions. Sound judgement, common sense, and a full understanding of the
applicable system(s) are essential to deal effectively with emergency/
abnormal conditions. Multiple emergencies, weather, or other factors may
require modification of the procedures.

Under any set of circumstances, you must prioritize what you do to handle
the situation. The first priority is always to fly the aircraft—this is true
whether you are airborne or on the ground—#1, MAINTAIN AIRCRAFT
CONTROL. Although it may seem obvious, experience has shown that
some aircrews do not always do this. They jump immediately into their
checklists and become engrossed with analyzing various aircraft
subsystems, while talking with the SOF/center/wingman/etc. Do not
become a passenger—F LY the aircraft from the moment you strap it on
until you get it back to the chocks and return it to the crew chief.

Your next priority is to analyze the abnormal indications, figure out what
is wrong, and then correct the problem, or come up with a plan to cope
with the situation—#2, ANALYZE THE SITUATION AND TAKE THE
PROPER ACTION. This does not mean running a complete functional
check flight on the entire aircraft; but it does mean you have to know the
aircraft systems and understand how to handle a degraded aircraft. It
also means you need to use the checklist to verify that you have
accomplished the appropriate procedure(s).

Your third priority is to get the aircraft back on Terra Firma—hopefully in
a controlled manner—#3, LAND AS SOON AS PRACTICAL. This should
be done expeditiously, but it does not mean putting the aircraft on the
next piece of concrete you can find (unless you have no other choice).
Modern aircraft just do not come apart around you! There is time for you
to set up a controlled approach for a safe landing. Do not be in such a
hurry to get back on the ground that you rush yourself and get behind the
power curve; i.e., continue to fly the aircraft. However, if you find yourself
with your hands full of aircraft, deteriorating weather, etc., etc., do not
box yourself into a square corner—maintain a safe ejection altitude and do
not hesitate to eject if the need arises.

D-1 ACG-9


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_8.jpeg:
So, the three basic rules to follow in any emergency situation are:
@ maintain aircraft control,

e analyze the situation and take the proper action, and

e land as soon as practical.

Some other priorities you may want to consider in addition to the three
basics are: talking, who is running the show, and backup plans.

It is amazing how many people want to talk to you as soon as you declare
an emergency (your flight lead/wingman, center, the SOF, the ranger,
tower, ad nauseam). Resist the temptation to talk to these people and
concentrate on the three basic rules (or at least the first two, initially).
When you have that squared away, then talk. However, do not forget the
person in the other cockpit—he/she can be a big help, so keep each other
informed. Once you have the situation well in hand, inform the rest of the
free world what you are going to do.

And that is the next point—use everyone else to help you, but it is your
show, so you run it. Do not let somebody on the ground put you behind
the eight ball. Have a plan, let everyone know what it is, and then use
those outside agencies to help you.

One last point—the best laid plans of mice and men, etc. Have a backup
plan just in case your original plan does not work. If you do not have one
and need it when everything goes wrong, you may not have time to call an
audible.

In summary, when you find yourself in an emergency situation follow the

basic rules, talk when you are ready, run the situation, and have a backup
plan.

ACG-9 D-2


Text from ACG-9_Emergency_Procedures__Abnormal_Operations_page_9.jpeg:
STARTING
JFS Fails to Start

If the JFS ready light does not come on in 10 seconds and there are no
other indications that the JFS is running, have the crew chief check the
JFS system. After the crew chief is clear, wait 30 seconds and attempt
another JFS start.

If the JFS ready light does not come on, but the JFS sounds normal and
the intercom and AMAD fire light work, then the JFS ready light is
inoperative. The light should be replaced before taxiing. Start the right
engine, shut down the JFS, and have the crew chief replace the bulb.

JFS Fails to Engage

The throttles must be in the off position and the master switches must be
on to engage the JFS to the engine. If both of these conditions are met,
cycle the master switch and raise/release the fingerlift again. If that does
not work, do not attempt another start.

JFS Engagement/Disengagement is Abnormal

Once the JFS is engaged, any abnormality requires an immediate JFS
shutdown. Shut the throttle off, turn the master switches off, and
shutdown the JFS. Abnormalities could include no JFS whine increase,
no engine rotation, rpm hangup, or JFS disengagement. If the JFS fails to
decelerate/disengage after either engine start, shut down the JFS and
engine, and abort the aircraft.

If the JFS shuts down after starting the first engine, that is abnormal. Do

not shut down the first engine, restart the JFS, start the second engine
and then the first engine. Abort the aircraft.

D-3 ACG-9


