Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIRCRAFT GENERAL
ACG-2
PROPULSION SYSTEM

AUGUST 1999
(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_10.jpeg:
A cockpit readout of N2 speed (rpm%) is provided in the tachometer

portion of the engine monitor display (Figure D-3). Fan turbine inlet

temperature is sensed between N:1 and Nz.

7, 3
4 \co
a |cn
=—s
NO
OO
z

P
0
OIL PSI

yey’ SS;
1c
(3

100

°o 2 @|°}O 8°o
as e010 80
ome Te Q
m¢,c—||oo

[ol
Foo EL

ACG-02-03

FCP

Figure D - 3. Engine Monitor Display FCP.

ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_11.jpeg:
Afterburner Section

After passing through the turbines, high velocity exhaust gas enters the
afterburner section where it is mixed with the flow of bypass air. When
afterburner is selected on the throttle, fuel is sprayed into the forward
portion of the section through a series of spray rings and is ignited. Since
the air entering the afterburner section is already compressed and at high
velocity, the fuel/air ignition creates a ram jet and provides a significant
increase in thrust. Five segments of afterburner are available depending
on throttle position. Afterburner ignition is provided by two more igniters
per engine which receive their power from the same engine-mounted
generator that powers the igniters for the combustion section.
Afterburner ignition, however, is not continuous. It is provided for 1-1/2
seconds after the throttle is advanced into the AB range.

A light-off detector (LOD) in the AB section tells the system if a light-off
occurs. Once lit, the afterburner combustion is self-sustaining. However,
if a light does not occur (or is not detected), a series of events
automatically takes place without the aircrew having to recycle the
throttle. First, the system automatically terminates AB, resets to MIL
and checks to see if the LOD is functioning properly. If the LOD checks
good, three more relight attempts occur automatically. If the LOD checks
bad, one more relight attempt is made using tail pipe pressure to verify
AB light-off. If a relight occurs, you will notice it only as a hesitation in
obtaining an AB light. If the automatic relight attempts are unsuccessful,
the system resets itself to MIL (throttle in AB); this may take up to 12
seconds. Cycle the throttle out of AB and back to AB if another series of
relight attempts is desired.

D-5 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_12.jpeg:
Variable Nozzles

The final engine section is the convergent-divergent nozzle system, which
is continuously variable between minimum and maximum opening. The
nozzles control the velocity of the exhaust gases, and therefore control the
back pressure in the engine, which in turn controls the N: turbine speed.
The nozzle actuators are operated by a mechanical cable that is driven by
a pneumatic motor. A cockpit gauge readout is provided on the engine
monitor display in percent open (i.e., 100% is fully open, while 0% is fully
closed) (Figure D-4). Another source of nozzle position is on the
MPD/MPCD, which uses digital electronic engine control (DEEC) supplied
information. The nozzles are positioned as a function of throttle setting,
but receive an additional input from the position of the gear handle. With
the gear handle down (whether or not weight is on wheels), the nozzles
open to approximately 80% at idle to minimize thrust during ground taxi
operations. The nozzles close progressively as power is advanced and are
at the closed position (5-10%) at MIL power. When the AB is in use, the
nozzles progressively open to 50-75%. With the gear handle up, the
nozzles are near minimum area at all times except at MIL or above. At
MIL, the nozzle indicators will show the nozzles slightly open (5-10%) and
as the throttle is advanced to the afterburner range, the nozzles schedule
further open to compensate for increasing afterburner fuel flow.

rc

ENGINE R

RPM %

TEMP °C

FF
PPH

3) \u0
Lo
ru

Lo
ru
A
Lo
c

£9
a)
£3
a)
La
Lo
£3
£3

7
1S
SS

or.
oe

C3

ACG-02-04

Figure D - 4. Engine Monitor Display.

ACG-2 D-6


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_13.jpeg:
F100-PW-229 Engine

Newer F-15E aircraft, starting with tail number 90-233, are equipped
with the F100-PW-229 engines. It is the same basic engine as the -220
but has greater thrust and a lower cruise fuel flow. It produces 17,800
pounds of thrust in MIL and 29,000 pounds in MAX AB. The -229 has
eleven stages of afterburner as opposed to five in the -220. This provides
more power and smoother AB operation. Additional information on the
new engine will be provided at your operational unit if the aircraft there
are equipped with the -229.

D-7 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_14.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The RCVV/CIVVs are designed to inside the engine?
a. regulate Nez turbine speed
b. minimize airflow disruption
c. compress more air

2. The difference between engine and afterburner ignition is that

a 2

they receive their power from different sources.

engine ignition has more igniter plugs than afterburner ignition.
engine ignition is provided before fuel is available, while
afterburner ignition is provided after fuel is available.

engine ignition is continuous while afterburner ignition is timed
for 1-1/2 seconds.

3. The variable nozzles control exit velocity of the exhaust gasses and

a. anozzle position readout is provided in the cockpit in % closed.

b. are operated hydraulically.

c. operate only as a function of throttle position.

d. control N: turbine speed by regulating engine back pressure.
4. Engine bypass air provides additional and

ACG-2



Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_15.jpeg:
ANSWERS

thrust/cooling

D-9 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_16.jpeg:
ENGINE ASSOCIATED SYSTEMS
Engine Control System
Throttles

Throttles are provided in both front and rear cockpits (Figure D-5).

ACG-02-05

Figure D - 5. Throttles.

The engines may be operated from IDLE through MAX AB from either
cockpit; however, the engines can only be started and shut down with the
FCP throttles. A throttle friction lever controls the friction for both sets of
throttles and is incorporated in the base of the FCP throttle quadrant.

ACG-2 D-10


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_17.jpeg:
A set of dual-function fingerlifts are incorporated forward of the FCP
throttle grips. Lifting the appropriate fingerlift and releasing it couples
the jet fuel starter (JFS) to that engine for starting. Moving the throttle
forward (no fingerlift here) from CUTOFF to IDLE then opens the
mechanical fuel shutoff valve in the main fuel control (MFC) and
energizes the ignition circuit. The fingerlift will now lock the throttle out
of the CUTOFF range to prevent inadvertent engine shutdown. The
fingerlifts must be lifted to move the throttles below IDLE and must then
be released to move the throttles to OFF (two steps).

Movement from IDLE to OFF closes the main fuel shutoff valve, stopping
fuel flow to the engine.

In addition to the mike button and speed brake switches, which are
contained on both sets of throttles, the FCP throttles contain a number of
other switches engineered to provide control of weapon systems features
with hands on throttles and stick (HOTAS). Operation of these switches,
as well as operation of the rudder trim switches (located on both throttle
quadrants) and the flap control switch (located on the FCP quadrant), are
covered in later lessons.

Digital Electronic Engine Control (DEEC)

The DEECs (one per engine) are computers powered by a dedicated
engine-mounted alternator. The DEEC controls all operating parameters
for its engine from IDLE through MAX AB. It receives inputs from
throttle and landing gear handle positions. It also receives inputs from
numerous sensors located throughout the engine to schedule fuel flow,
afterburner operation and program positioning of the CIVV, RCVV,
nozzles and engine heat bleed air valves. The DEEC is programmed with
engine operating schedules and limitations and compares its program
with actual engine performance. It adjusts the engine trim to attain peak
engine performance at all times. The DEKC overrides the aircrew’s
throttle commands if it determines the commands adversely affect engine
operation. The DEEC inhibits throttle selections as required to maintain
peak engine performance. This is evident in a high altitude, low airspeed
situation when the throttles are moved into afterburner range and
afterburner operation is degraded or inhibited. In addition, it contains a
built-in logic circuit to help recover the engine if it should encounter an
engine stall and/or stagnation.

D-11 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_18.jpeg:
If the DEEC detects a fault that will not allow it to safely control the
engine, it will close the CIVV, close the nozzles to less than 5%, turn on
the engine control caution and transfer control of the remaining engine
variables to the main fuel control. AB operation is automatically
inhibited. Maximum thrust available with the engine in secondary mode
is only 70-80% of normal MIL power (about 85% rpm). Gradually, all -220
engines will be fitted with new MFCs, which will provide 80-100% of
normal MIL thrust in the secondary mode. Caution should be used when
operating in the secondary mode because the engine may overtemp at
high throttle settings if the nozzle is too far open. Monitor fan turbine
inlet temperature (FTIT) closely when advancing the throttle to ensure
that normal operating limits are not exceeded.

Main Fuel Control (MFC)

A main fuel control is mounted on each engine and carries out the
hydromechanical functions commanded by its associated DEEC. It
provides a secondary mode that is capable of scheduling engine operations
and fuel flow if its DEEC is not operating. Contained within each MFC is
a mechanical fuel shutoff valve. These valves are mechanically connected
to the throttles and provide the aircrew with the primary means of
terminating fuel flow to the engines. Since the MFC is located on the
engine, closing the throttle results in immediate engine shutdown, but
fuel remains in the line between the airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valve
and MFC. A small amount of fuel remaining in the line between the MFC
and engine at engine shutdown is purged overboard through ports in the
belly of the aircraft. Prior to shutdown, coordinate with the ground crew
about catching the vented fuel in a container. The -229 engine does not
purge the fuel overboard. Instead, it is cooled and recycled back to the
fuel tanks.

ACG-2 D-12


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_19.jpeg:
Engine Monitoring System

The F100-PW-220 engine incorporates an engine diagnostic unit (EDU)
that works in conjunction with the DEEC to record abnormal engine
operating statistics and flag them for maintenance repair. Readouts for
this system are found on the Avionics Status Panel on the left side of the
nose wheel well. Aircrew are not directly involved with this system, but
should know of its existence. Maintenance personnel use a data collection
unit (DCU) to retrieve information from the EDU and to read engine
faults. Engine fault flags should be checked before and after every flight.
Engine operating data and malfunctions can also be written to the data
transfer module (DTM) for postflight analysis.

D-18 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC
275381.

Supersedes: ACG-2, October, 1998
OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_20.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. During normal operation, the DEEC

a. controls CIVV and nozzle position only in the IDLE through
MIL power range.

b. controls all engine variables in the IDLE through MAX AB
range and continuously trims the engine.

c. carries out the hydromechanical functions commanded by the
main fuel control.

d. __ will be of no help if an engine stall and/or stagnation is
encountered.

2. The MFC contains a(n) controlled fuel shutoff valve which is
controlled by the . Closing the valve terminates fuel flow
the engine.

a. _ electrically, engine master switch, inside

b. electrically, fire pushbutton, forward of

c. mechanically, throttle, forward of

d. mechanically, throttle, inside

3. Which of the following statements is true regarding the throttles?

a.

©

ACG-2

The FCP fingerlifts couple the JFS to the engine during engine
start and lock the throttles out of CUTOFF after they are
running.

A throttle friction lever is incorporated in the base of each
throttle quadrant.

AB is only selectable from the FCP.

Engines may be shut down from either cockpit.


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_21.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D-15 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_22.jpeg:
Engine Controls and Indicators

Engine Control Switches

Control of the DEECs is provided through two engine control switches
located on the FCP engine control panel. These are two-position electrical
switches with the positions labeled ON and OFF (Figure D-6).

zmo
ozm
RPAZOQ

O

= AMADYSAW —

AMARPFE ozm WD

L
E
N
G
M
A
Ss
iu
E
R

FCP

ACG-02-06
Figure D - 6. Engine Control Switches.

ON Enables the DEEC to provide normal engine control.

OFF Engine control is transferred to the MFC (secondary mode),
CIVVs are fully closed, nozzle is closed (5%), engine thrust is
80-100% of MIL thrust and afterburner is inhibited.

If a DEEC malfunctions and switches to secondary mode, it will remain in

this mode until the failure clears and the appropriate engine control
switch is cycled from ON to OFF and back to ON.

ACG-2 D-16



Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_23.jpeg:
Engine Master Switches

The engine master switches are located on the FCP engine control panel
(Figure D-7) and are covered with green switch guards to prevent
inadvertent actuation.

DAAZOO

R
J
; G
A
R M
T A
E S
R T
E
a R

ACG-02-07

Figure D - 7. Engine Master Switches.

The switches are two position (ON/OFF) electrical switches. They are
armed anytime there is a source of electrical power on the aircraft.

ON Opens the airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valve, powers fuel
transfer pumps and enables JFS/engine coupling.

OFF Closes the airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valve, turns off fuel
transfer pumps and decouples JFS from the engine.

Airframe-Mounted Fuel Shutoff Valve
There are two airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valves that are opened and

closed by using either the engine master switches or the engine fire push
buttons.

D-17 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_24.jpeg:
Fuel is boosted out of each of the fuselage fuel tanks, through these
shutoff valves, to the engines. The valves are physically located outside of
the engine bays to provide the capability to stop the flow of fuel to the hot
section of an engine in case of fire. Therefore, closing a shutoff valve does
not cause the engine to stop immediately since the fuel in the line between
the valve and the engine must be consumed first.

Vmax Switch

A Vmax switch is located under the FCP left canopy sill (Figure D-8). The
function of this switch is to provide a 4% increase in thrust and a 4%
increase in fuel flow at airspeeds in the top end of the envelope. When the
switch is engaged, with airspeed above Mach 1.1 and full AB selected, the
DEEC commands a 22°C increase in FTIT and a 2% increase in rpm. The
purpose of the switch is to provide an extra dash capability in an actual
combat emergency. Use of the Vmax switch is prohibited under any other
circumstance.

<xbPSsc

FCP

ACG-02-08

ACG-2 D-18


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_25.jpeg:
The switch is guarded and safety wired to the OFF position. Any use of
this switch requires an aircraft write-up and an engine borescope
inspection prior to the next flight due to possible overtemp damage in the
hot section. The Dash 1 contains other operating limits that should be
noted.

Engine Monitor Display (EMD)

The EMD is a liquid crystal display and is located on the FCP lower main
instrument panel. It displays all data necessary to monitor engine
performance (Figure D-9).

ENGINE R

RPM %

TEMP °C

ACG-02-09

Figure D - 9. Engine Monitor Display.

D-19 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_26.jpeg:
During engine start, the EMD is blank until the first engine reaches
approximately 15-17% rpm. At that time, the emergency generator comes
on line and enables the EMD to display rpm and FTIT only. At
approximately 56-58% rpm, the main generator comes on line and enables
the EMD to display all engine data. If, during normal operations, both
main generators are lost, power for the EMD reverts to the emergency
generator again and only rpm and FTIT display on the EMD. The EMD
displays engine data in the following format:

RPM

TEMP

FUEL FLOW

NOZZLE

OIL

Displays compressor/N2 rpm from 0 to 110% in 1%
increments.

Displays fan turbine inlet temperature (FTIT or Ni
temp) in degrees Centigrade from 200° to 1400° in
10° increments.

Displays main engine fuel flow in pounds per hour
(pph) from 0 to 99,900 in 100 pound increments.

Displays exhaust nozzle position in percent open
from 0 to 100% in 10% increments.

Displays oil pressure in psi from 0 to 100 psi in 5
psi increments.

If any engine data exceeds the display range of the EMD, that data
display goes blank until it returns to within display parameters.

ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_27.jpeg:
Engine data may also be displayed on an MPD/MPCD by pressing PB #18
from the menu. This is the only way engine data can be monitored from
the rear cockpit. Data displayed on the MPD/MPCD will not necessarily
agree exactly with data displayed on the EMD. The MPD/MPCD display
will be a little more accurate because the display increments are smaller.
If any engine data exceeds the display range of the MPD/MPCD, it does
not go blank as the EMD does, but continues to display the maximum or
minimum display parameter. If the FTIT exceeds 1000° or the oil
pressure is less than 8 psi (Figure D-10), the MPD displays the faulty
parameter boxed and increased in intensity. This change does not appear
for high oil pressure. Ifa color display has been selected, the parameter is
displayed in yellow and boxed. If any data signal is invalid or no signal is
being received, the word OFF is displayed. Cruise data will be covered in

IFIGUGIGIGT

©

ENGINE L

RPM% 93
TEMP C 920
FF/PPH 9800
NOZ POS% 17
OIL PSI 75

IE

CRUISE DATA
RANGE NM
TIME HRS:MIN
COMMAND ALT KFT
COMMAND MACH

=
:

END
FUEL 800 NM

1200 B
TIC Lf

Seeee

Figure D - 10. MPD Engine Display with Limits Exceeded.

ACG-02-10

D-21 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_28.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Which of the following is true regarding the Vmax switch?

a.

It may be used during single engine operations if required to
sustain flight.

It is of little use if airspeed is already above 350 KCAS.

It may be used in actual combat if required to chase down an
enemy aircraft.

Its use is prohibited except in an actual combat emergency where
extra dash capability is required.

2. Before the main generator comes on line, during engine start, the

EMD will display

a. rpm, FTIT and fuel flow.

b. rpm, FTIT and oil pressure.

c. rpmandFTIT.

d. rpm, FTIT, oil pressure, nozzles and fuel flow.

ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_29.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 238 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_3.jpeg:
AIRCRAFT GENERAL

COVER

PROPULSION SYSTEM

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying the F-15E propulsion system. It
discusses the components, nomenclature and operational characteristics of
the propulsion system.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 00. eeeceessneeceeneeeesseeecesaeecseeeesssaeeesesaeesesaeesesaeeens A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROSs)............eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. eee eeeeeeeeeeeees C-1
TEXT ec eeeccecccessteeeceeesseeeeceessaeeeceesssseeceeessseeeceessaeeesesesaaeeeseeeaeeesene D-1
END OF PET QUA: cess ces sone sass svn sens anus canis save onen ous sas dois eave sasa sae ants amis cee ass E-1
GLOSSARY. eeecceesseeeesnceeessaeeceseeecnseeeesaeecesaeeseseaeecesaeesssaeesesaeeens F-1

A-1 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_30.jpeg:
Engine Oil System

The F100-PW-220 engine utilizes a fully self-contained oil system. Its
only function is to lubricate and cool the engine bearings. The main pump
element is gravity fed. System pressure is unregulated and varies greatly
with the speed of the engine. For the first minute after engine start, it is
acceptable to see oil pressure readings from 0-100 psi at idle. After that,
however, oil pressure must stabilize between 15-80 psi. Oil pressure
fluctuations of +10 psi are acceptable if the average is within limits. In
addition, the pressure difference between readings at IDLE and MIL
power on a given engine must be at least 15 psi, indicating sufficient oil
volume.

Secondary Power System

Jet Fuel Starter (JFS)

The JFS is a small jet engine used to start the aircraft engines (Figure
D-11). It provides the only means to start the engines on the ground and,
once operating, engages one engine at a time through the start sequence.
Its controls are in the FCP only. It may also be used in flight to perform a
JFS assisted restart (Dash 1, Section IIT). Fuel is provided by the main
aircraft fuel system.

JFS
ACCUMULATORS

ACG-02-11

Figure D - 11. Secondary Power System.

ACG-2 D - 24


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_31.jpeg:
JFS ignition and electrical power are provided by a JFS mounted
generator. Starting power for the JFS is provided by a hydraulic motor
driven by hydraulic pressure accumulators. These are charged
automatically by the utility system or manually by a hand pump (Figure
D-12).

ACCUMULATORS

JFS ACCUMULATOR
HAND PUMP

GAUGES

UPPER
ACCUMULATOR

ACCUMULATOR PISTON
)ewmmm POSITION INDICATOR

LOWER () 40 20 30___40 50 60 70 80 g0___100

ACCUMULATOR

ACG-02-12

Figure D - 12. JFS Accumulator Servicing.

The JFS fuel circuit is energized by the JFS starter switch on the right
console. It has ON and OFF positions and normally is left ON since the
JFS automatically shuts down when the second engine reaches
approximately 40% to 50% rpm. It may be shut down at any time by
placing the switch OFF. With the switch ON, pulling the JFS handle
straight out discharges one JFS accumulator. Rotating the handle 45°
counterclockwise and pulling discharges both accumulators, or the
remaining accumulator, if one has already been discharged. The handle is
spring loaded to return to normal. Illumination of the READY light
indicates the JFS is ready to be engaged.

D-25 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_32.jpeg:
Raising either throttle fingerlift engages the JFS to that engine. After the
second engine starts, the READY light goes out as the JFS automatically
shuts down (Figure D-13).

-men Ame
ADMADSAMV

ea ax|

ozm
DAZOQ

EMERG GEN
c M
FF

fo
Or ISOLATE

_

a,

ap
fh
Pod
Ls)
<

°o 8

oa Od

io] 2
a \ |

WL AMADLSAW —!

AmMAg>r=Ee O2M
mMAor= ozm WD

fe)
a
an

ACG-02-13

Figure D - 13. JFS Controls.

Central Gear Box (CGB)

The CGB provides the mechanical connection between the hydraulic motor
and the JFS during the JFS start. It then provides gearing and clutching
functions necessary to transmit power from JFS to the left and right
AMADs for engine start, and then to decouple the JFS from the AMADs
once the engines come up to speed. Its function is completely automatic
and cannot be controlled from the cockpit.

ACG-2 D - 26


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_33.jpeg:
Airframe Mounted Accessory Drives (AMADs)

The left and right AMAD gear boxes are directly connected to their
respective engines (Figure D-14). The CGB utilizes this direct connection
to transmit power from the JFS to the engine during start and, after
engine start, the direct connection allows the engine to power the AMAD
accessories. The accessories associated with each AMAD include a utility
hydraulic pump, a power control hydraulic pump and a main electrical
generator. The specific functions of these accessories will be covered in
later lessons, and it will suffice to say here that all aircraft hydraulic and
electrical functions can be supported from one AMAD if the other engine
or its associated gear box should fail.

JFS
ACCUMULATORS

CENTRAL
GEAR BOX
(CGB)

DECOUPLER DECOUPLER

LEFT JET FUEL RIGHT

STARTER
ENGINE
(JES) ENGINE

ACG-02-14

Figure D - 14. Secondary Power System.

D-27 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_34.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. The secondary power system consists of

Be op

two hydraulic accumulators, the JFS and two AMADs.
the JFS, the CGB and two AMADs.

the generators, hydraulic pumps and the JFS.

two JFS accumulators, a hydraulic motor and the JFS.

2. Identify the correct sequence for starting the JFS.

Pull the JFS control handle, rotate the handle 45°
counterclockwise and place the JFS starter switch to ON.
Depress the JFS ready light, pull the JFS control handle and
place the JFS starter switch to ON.

Place the JFS starter switch to ON, pull and release the JFS
control handle, and wait for the JFS ready light to come on.
Place the JFS starter switch to ON, rotate and pull the JFS
control handle, and wait for the JFS LOW caution to go out.

3. Each AMAD is directly connected to its respective engine and
provides power to

a.
b.

eo

ACG-2

the central gear box.

a main electrical generator, a utility hydraulic pump and a power
control hydraulic pump.

charge the JFS accumulators.

start the JFS.


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_35.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 29 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_36.jpeg:
Fire Warning and Extinguishing System

Pneumatically Operated Circuitry

The F-15E incorporates pneumatically operated fire detection circuitry
that utilizes helium gas. When heated to a predetermined temperature,
this gas expands enough to trip the fire warning system. Each fire
detection loop consists of two sensor elements, which are continuously
compared and averaged against each other to eliminate false fire lights
caused by a faulty element. Two separate fire detection loops are provided
for each engine bay and one each for the AMAD and JFS portions of the
AMAD/JFS compartment.

Fire Extinguisher Bottle

A single fire extinguisher bottle, located in the aft fuselage area between
the engines, normally provides a one-shot, one-compartment capability of
extinguishing a fire. However, if more than one FIRE PUSH button is
pressed, the agent is released to all areas selected. The halon gas in the
fire bottle is nontoxic, noncorrosive and will not damage aircraft
components.

ACG-2 D - 30


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_37.jpeg:
Fire Lights

Three push button-type fire lights are located on the FCP main
instrument panel, and two engine fire repeater lights are located in the
RCP (Figure D-15). These lights come on steady when the temperature in
the appropriate bay exceeds the limits of the fire detection circuit.

©)

ENG FIRE | [ ENGFIRE || CANOPY FLT MASTER DISPLAY
CAUT LGEN RGEN || emisumT || FUEL LOW || NUCLEAR ||UNOSED || CHAFF FLARE |] OXYGEN

DISCHARGE

OFF

TEST "A
AMAD

(FUE |
aH &
Fu
Led

+

(|

[2 \()
Maa

L R
BURN THRU BURN THRU

FRONT COCKPIT REAR COCKPIT

ACG-02-15
Figure D - 15. Fire Warning Lights.

A spring loaded metal guard protects the FCP fire push buttons from
inadvertent actuation. Raising the clip and depressing the AMAD FIRE
PUSH light arms the fire extinguisher bottle for release into the
AMAD/JFS compartment. In addition, if the JFS is running, a signal is
sent to a relay, which closes the fuel valve for the JFS as soon as the
discharge switch is activated.

Depressing either engine fire light simultaneously arms the fire
extinguisher bottle for release, and closes the airframe-mounted fuel
shutoff valve and the bleed air valves. The engine decelerates but may
continue running below idle rpm for up to 120 seconds until the fuel
downstream of the airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valve is consumed.

D-31 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_38.jpeg:
Depressing any of the FCP fire lights reveals approximately one eighth
inch of yellow and black stripes around the inside lip of the light housing
to show activation. Depressing the fire light a second time disarms the
extinguisher and restores the system to normal operation and appearance.

Electrical power is required to operate the fire warning/extinguishing
system. If only the JFS is operating then only the AMAD system is
operative. Once the emergency generator is on line, the engine fire lights
are operative.

Afterburner Burn-Through Lights

The front cockpit has left and right BURN THRU warning lights to
indicate a single point burn-through or overtemperature condition in the
afterburner section. The system is independent of the AMAD/engine fire
detection system and fire suppression is not provided. The sensing
elements are located in the center keel area (to protect against engine to
engine burn-through) and in the left and right empennage boom areas (to
protect stabilator components). One main generator must be operational
before the FCP BURN THRU lights and voice warning are operational.

ACG-2 D - 32


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_39.jpeg:
Discharge/Test Switch

The discharge/test switch (Figure D-16) is a three-position electrical
switch that is spring loaded to the OFF position. The discharge switch
requires the same electrical power as the fire push buttons.

OFF

TEST

DISCHARGE

AMAD

LFUIRE |
[ lie_|

L ENGINE R

+

[> IZ
[> J

(a
[> |i

L R
BURN THRU BURN THRU

ACG-02-16

Figure D - 16. Discharge Test Switch.

Provides normal fire warning.

Checks all fire detection circuitry, lights and voice
warning. The FCP fire lights are divided into four
sections with an individual light bulb in each section. The
top two bulbs of the AMAD light are associated with the
AMAD fire sensor loop and the bottom two bulbs with the
JFS fire sensor loop.

D - 33 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_4.jpeg:
1. Identify the function and operational characteristics of the six major
components of the F100-PW-220 engine.

2. Identify the function and the operational characteristics of the DEEC
and the main fuel control.

3. Identify the function of engine controls and indicators.

4. Identify the operating limits for the engine and engine-associated
systems.

5. Identify the function and operational characteristics of the variable
ramps and the air inlet controllers.

6. Identify the basic operational characteristics of the engine oil system.

7. Identify the operational characteristics of the engine secondary
power system.

8. Identify the operational characteristics of the fire warning/
extinguisher system.

9. Identify the indications and actions of a normal engine start.

10. Given cockpit indications, identify engine-related malfunctions and
the initial action required.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1 Section I Engines, Fire Warning/Extinguishing

CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

System, Secondary Power System,
Warning/Caution/Advisory Lights,
Voice Warning System

Section IT Starting Engines

Section III Starting Emergencies, Engine
Failure/Fire on T/O, Engine-related
In-flight Emergencies, Single Engine
Landing

Section V Engine Limitations, AB Operating
Envelope, JFS Limitations

ACG-2 B-1


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_40.jpeg:
The top bulbs of the engine fire lights are associated with
the forward (A) transponder loop and the bottom lights
are associated with the aft (B) transponder loop. Both
loops run the entire length of the engine bay for
redundancy.

Failure of any of the pairs of lights to illuminate during
test indicates failure of the corresponding sensor loop.
(The aft cockpit engine fire lights contain only two bulbs.
If either of the sensor loops fail on an engine, the
associated fire light (RCP) will not illuminate during the
test.)

DISCHARGE Switch is lever-locked and spring-loaded to the OFF
position. Momentary contact immediately discharges the
fire bottle into the selected compartment. If the AMAD
circuit is selected and JFS is running, fuel flow to the JFS
is terminated.

Fire Voice Warning

The F-15E incorporates a voice warning system that warns of
engine/AMAD fire. This feature is activated by the same circuitry as the
fire lights. The voice warning is repeated twice and not given again,
unless the condition reoccurs after being corrected. For an engine/AMAD
fire, the voice states “WARNING, ENGINE FIRE RIGHT,” “WARNING,
ENGINE FIRE LEFT” or “WARNING, AMAD FIRE.”

Separate from the fire detection circuitry is an engine overtemp voice
warning that is activated whenever either engine FTIT exceeds 1000°. In
this case, the voice warning and an abnormal indication on the EMD or
MPD/MPCD engine display may be your only indications that this
problem exists. The warning voice states “WARNING OVERTEMP
LEFT” or “WARNING OVERTEMP RIGHT.”

For a single-point burn-through or overtemperature condition in the
afterburner section the voice warning states “AB BURN THRU LEFT” or
“AB BURN THRU RIGHT,” pauses and then repeats the warning again.

ACG-2 D - 34


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_41.jpeg:
Cautions and Warnings

An ENGINE caution light is located on both front and rear cockpit caution
light panels (Figure D-17). The ENGINE caution is a major category light
and comes on as a result of a detailed caution on your MPD/MPCD. The
MASTER CAUTION illuminates in conjunction with all engine cautions to
attract the aircrew’s attention.

@
(PROGRAM) (CN
(oar CR
ENEREST ON) (BSTSYS WAL]
("NUCLEAR [“FUELLOW
Cicn— CRN

(LENGINE_] (FLT CONTR }

HYD ("Aver
(DSPCFLOLO | (~ OXYGEN _}
(("SPARE__]((_SPARE__]
(("SPARE___]({__SPARE__]

FRONT COCKPIT

REAR COCKPIT

ENG FIRE ]| ENGFIRE || CANOPY
RIGHT |]UNLOCKED |] LOW ALT ©

S)

MSTR
CAUT

ACG-02-17

Figure D - 17. Engine Caution Light.

The engine major category light will NOT go out until the problem that
caused the light to come on is corrected. There are several fuel, bleed air
and engine related problems that cause the ENGINE caution light to come
on, but they will be covered in other lessons. Below are a few engine
related cautions that trip the ENGINE caution light.

L/R INLET The appropriate air inlet controller has failed.

L/R ENG CONTR The appropriate DEEC has failed.

L/R OIL PRES7S Low oil pressure on the appropriate engine.

FIRE SENSOR The continuously averaging fire detection system has
detected a faulty fire sensing element.

INLET ICE Ice buildup has been detected by a probe in the left
intake.

D- 35 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_42.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
1. Testing the AMAD fire detection circuit is first possible

before the JFS is running.

after the first main generator comes on line.
after the emergency generator comes on line.
as soon as the JFS comes up to speed.

pe op

2. Testing the engine fire detection circuit is first possible

after the first main generator comes on the line.
after the emergency generator comes on the line.
as soon as the JFS comes up to speed.

before the JFS is running.

pe op

3. When the AMAD fire light is depressed with the JFS running, the

a. light goes out.

b. fire bottle is discharged into the AMAD/JFS compartment and fuel
flow to the JFS is terminated.

c. fire bottle is armed for discharge into the AMAD/JFS compartment
and fuel flow to the JFS is terminated.

d. fire bottle is armed for discharge into the AMAD/JFS compartment
and a signal is sent to terminate fuel flow to the JFS when the
discharge switch is activated.

4. When an engine fire light is depressed and the discharge switch
activated,

a. the fire bottle is discharged into the appropriate engine
compartment, but the engine continues to run unless the throttle
is placed in CUTOFF.

b. fuel flow is terminated forward of the engine bay, bleed air valves
are closed and the fire bottle is discharged into the appropriate
engine bay.

c. fuel flow is terminated at the MFC, bleed air valves are opened and
the fire bottle is discharged into the appropriate engine bay.

ACG-2 D - 36


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_43.jpeg:
ANSWERS

D - 37 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_44.jpeg:
Air Induction System

The function of the air induction system is to provide air at optimum
subsonic flow to the face of the engine.

Ramps

A series of four variable ramps and a bypass door (Figure D-18) perform
this function throughout a wide range of aircraft speeds and
angles-of-attack. The ramps are referred to as the No. 1 ramp, No. 2
ramp, No. 3 ramp and the diffuser ramp. All ramps and the bypass door
are electrically controlled and hydraulically actuated, with the left ramp
operating off the Utility A circuit and the right ramp operating off the
Utility B circuit.

FIRST RAMP
LOW ANGLE OF ATTACK ACTUATOR
DIFFUSER RAMP
ACTUATOR
RAMP 2 RAMP 3 CTUATO
/ BYPASS DOOR

DIFFUSER
RAMP PIVOT RAMP

ACG-02-18

Figure D - 18. F-15E Inlets.

The leading edge of the air intake pivots at its lower attachment point and
constitutes the No. 1 ramp. It provides a variable capture area to
optimize air flow into the intake throughout the aircraft flight envelope.
When the aircraft is on the ground with the engines shut down, the No. 1
ramp is in the full up position. When the generator comes on the line
(approximately 56-58% rpm during engine start) the ramp moves abruptly
to the full down position and tends to stay closed to full down during
ground operations and normal cruise airspeeds. As airspeed is increased,

ACG-2 D - 38


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_45.jpeg:
the No. 1 ramp begins to program up, but regardless of speed it moves
slightly up and down as slight variations in angle-of-attack occur.

The No. 2 and No. 3 ramps are located on the inside, upper surface of the
air intake, and are visible on preflight. The No. 2 ramp is hinged to the
No. 1 ramp, and the No. 3 ramp is hinged to No. 2 in such a manner that
all three ramps move in unison whenever No. 1 ramp is repositioned.

There are hundreds of tiny holes on the inside of the No. 1 ramp and on
the face of the No. 2 and 3 ramps. These holes bleed off boundary layer
air and reduce skin friction drag. Bleed off air from the No. 1 ramp spills
through a port located on the outside of the air intake, and bleed off air
from the No. 2 and 3 ramps spill through two ports on top of the intake.

The diffuser ramp, the last of the series, is located deeper within the
intake aft of the No. 3 ramp and is not visible during a normal preflight.
Although it is hinged to the No. 3 ramp, it remains flush until the aircraft
reaches .5 Mach. At that time, the ramp begins to program down into the
airstream to prevent a shock wave from forming in the intake. The ramp
reaches the full down position at 1.5 Mach.

A bypass door located in the upper surface of the intake works in direct
correlation with the diffuser ramp. As the diffuser ramp begins to
program down, the bypass door begins to program open to provide a
spillway for air diverted by the diffuser ramp. This air, as well as the
boundary layer air bled off of ramps 1, 2 and 3, is diverted directly into the
outside airstream and has nothing to do with the engine bypass air used
for production of thrust.

Air Inlet Controller (AIC)

An AIC is provided for each side of the aircraft to program movement of
the ramps based upon inputs from three probes located in front of the air
intakes. The specific functions of these three sensors are to measure
angle-of-attack, temperature and airspeed. The inputs from the three
probes are sensed by the AIC and an output stimulus is provided to the
first ramp and the diffuser ramp hydraulic actuators. A fourth AIC
sensing device is a pitot probe located inside the air intake duct. Its
function is to measure inlet duct pressure. The signal from this probe is
fed to the AIC for the movement and control of the bypass door. The AIC
receives feedback signals from the ramps and bypass door indicating their
actual position. Any difference between actual position and the position
that has been programmed is immediately corrected by the AIC.

D - 39 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_46.jpeg:
Inlet Ramp Switches

Inlet ramp switches for each inlet are located on the miscellaneous control
panel in the front cockpit (Figure D-19). These are two position, lever lock
electrical switches with positions labeled AUTO and EMERG.

AUTO With the switch in the AUTO position, the AIC
automatically controls the air inlet system. This is the
normal position.

EMERG With the ramp switch in the emergency position, electrical
power is removed from the ramps and the bypass door
actuators. The variable ramps are hydraulically locked up
and the bypass door is closed. If hydraulic pressure fails,
normal airloads force the ramps and bypass door to the
emergency position.

PULSER

INLET RAMP

EMERG

<a
© cer

[e)
[e)
{e)

si
c)

o\?
20/0

808

al

FCP

ACG-02-19

Figure D - 19. Inlet Ramp Switches.

ACG-2 D - 40


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_47.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
The AICs receive inputs that measure: airspeed,

fuel flow, angle-of-attack and FTIT.

angle-of-attack, FTIT and inlet duct pressure.

throttle position, angle-of-attack and inlet duct pressure.
angle-of-attack, total air temperature and inlet duct pressure.

pe op

Placing one of the ramp switches to the EMERG position moves the

associated ramp to the position and the bypass door :
a. full down, closed

b. up and locked, open

c. up and locked, closed

d. full down, open

D-41 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_48.jpeg:
ANSWERS

ACG-2 D - 42


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_49.jpeg:
OPERATING LIMITATIONS

Engine limitations are shown in Table D-1.

GROUND
CONDITION FTITC RPM% OIL PSI REMARKS |
Start | Note 5

has | | |
Military/AB ss} a 30-80 Notes 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9

Transient 970 30-80 Notes 2, 5, 8 and 10

Fluctuation +10 +1 +10 Notes 2, 3, 4 and 6
FLIGHT

CONDITION FTITC RPM% OIL PSI REMARKS

Airstart

a
Military/AB 2a 30-80 Notes 1, 2 and 7

Transient 30-80 Notes 2 and 11

Table D - 1. PW-220 Engine Limitations.

1. Use of the Vmax switch is prohibited.

2. FTIT and rpm limitations include fluctuations.

3. In phase fluctuation of more than one instrument, or short term cyclic
fluctuations accompanied by thrust surges, indicate engine control

problems.

4. Nozzle fluctuations are limited to +2% at military power and above.
Fluctuations are not permitted below military power.

5. Any oil pressure from 0 to 100 (pegged) psi is acceptable during start

and initial operation for a period not exceeding 1 minute after
reaching idle.

D - 43 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
quiz.

2. Read references in Sections I, I, III and V of TO 1F-15E-1.

C-1 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_50.jpeg:
6. Oil pressure fluctuations of +10 psi are acceptable if the average is
within limits.

7. At less than 0 G, oil pressure may drop as low as 0 psi.

8. For engine operation at military or above, oil pressure must increase
15 psi minimum above idle oil pressure.

9. Engine nozzle position is limited to 30% open or less at military
power.

10. Maximum temperature limited to 30 seconds.

11. Maximum temperature limited to 10 seconds.

ACG-2 D - 44


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_51.jpeg:
Airspeed and Afterburner Operating Envelope

The airspeed and afterburner operating envelope is shown in Figure D-20.

70
60
AIRSPEED
LIMIT
fy 50
Lu
LL
8 40
=
Lu 30 ES
Q CFT AIRSPEED LIMIT I?
=) S23
FE Uys
F 20 25
mel
< tas
8
10 ys
P > ‘Oo ‘8 70 72 “9
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
VELOCITY - KNOTS (CAS)
ACG-02-20
Figure D - 20. PW-220 Engine AB Operating Envelope.
NOTE:
Region 1: DEEC limits initiation of AB to segments 1-4.
Segment 5 is blocked.
Region 2: DEEC limits AB to segment 1 or blocks segment
sequencing.

D- 45 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_52.jpeg:
Jet Fuel Starter (JFS)

Start-to-ready-light time: 10 seconds maximum (15 seconds
if temp below 0°F).
Starter engagement time: 90 seconds maximum (150 seconds

if hot start occurs).

Time between starter engagements: 10 seconds minimum from time the
first engine is at IDLE (20 seconds
if the first engagement time
exceeds 90 seconds).

NORMAL ENGINE START
Before Start

Before starting engines verify proper switch settings. The engine master
switches, engine control switches and JFS switch should be ON. The
ramp switches should be in AUTO. Also, ensure both throttles are in the
OFF position. Clear the intake area and signal the crew chief that you are
about to start the JFS. This signal is a pulling motion, just as if you were
pulling the JFS handle. The crew chief should clear the area around the
JFS exhaust and give you a thumbs-up signal when all is clear.

You cannot monitor the JFS during its start cycle, but you can hear it. As
you gain experience, you should be able to detect abnormal performance.
The EMD is available to monitor the rpm and FTIT after the emergency
generator comes on line at approximately 15-17%. The rest of the engine
indications are inoperative until a main generator comes on at about
56-58%.

JFS Start

JFS handle-pull and release. You hear the JFS start and wind up to idle
speed (ready light comes on within 10 seconds). The intercom works and
the AMAD fire detect circuit is operational. Test the circuit by
momentarily placing the discharge/test switch in the TEST position. The
AMAD light illuminates and voice warning is activated.

ACG-2 D - 46


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_53.jpeg:
Engine Start

The right engine is normally started first to check the right utility pump
pressure. Before starting the engine, notify the crew chief on the
intercom. Once the crew chief gives you the all-clear, raise and release the
right throttle fingerlift. This engages the JFS to the right engine. JFS
engagement is indicated by an audible decrease in JFS whine followed
immediately by an increase in pitch before engagement.

Engine rotation is apparent within approximately 5 seconds. The engine
fire detect circuit is operational when RPM and FTIT indications appear
on the EMD. Test the circuit by momentarily placing the discharge/test
switch in the TEST position. All three fire lights illuminate and the voice
warning activates.

When rpm reaches 20%, place the throttle to IDLE. The JFS continues to
accelerate the engine until light-off occurs or a steady state windmill
(23-30%) is achieved. Light-off normally occurs 10 seconds after throttle
advancement, but it can take up to 30 seconds. A normal start is
indicated by rpm acceleration occurring before initial FTIT movement.
The JFS helps accelerate the engine through approximately 40-50% and
then it automatically decouples. At approximately 56-58%, the right main
generator comes on line, the right ramp moves to the down position, full
engine data is presented on the EMD, and the MASTER CAUTION and
caution light panel illuminate. The engine continues to accelerate to idle
(approximately 60-70% rpm). The EMER BST ON caution comes on when
the first generator comes on line. This indicates that both the emergency
generator and the emergency boost pump are operating properly. Thirty
seconds after the main generator comes online, the BST SYS MAL caution
comes on as the emergency generator cuts off. This indicates that the
emergency fuel boost pump is powered by an abnormal source. Ensure
that the activation of these caution lights occurs in the correct order and
at the correct time.

The procedures for starting the left engine are the same as the right, only
you can monitor the engine instruments throughout the start.

D - 47 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_54.jpeg:
After Start

Confirm JFS shutdown with the crew chief. The JFS automatically
decouples when the second engine reaches approximately 40-50%. Ensure
that it shuts down with the JFS switch in the ON position. The crew chief
also confirms good ECS airflow on both engines. Check that the ECS
caution light is out in the cockpit. Check that the JFS LOW caution goes
out before you clear the crew chief off.

CAUTION

To prevent possible failure of the CGB
shear section, the ENG CONTR switch
position should not be changed during a
start. The switch may be positioned to
the desired setting 90 seconds after
advancing the throttle to IDLE.

The last engine check accomplished is before brake release, commonly
called the 80% check. Holding the brakes, advance the throttles to 80%
RPM and look for the following indications: 80% RPM, 600°C FTIT, 4000
lbs fuel flow, 20% open nozzles and 40 psi oil pressure (the 8-6-4-2-4 rule
of thumb). These are not hard and fast numbers, but you should see
approximately these indications. The key factor is for both engines to look
the same. After brake release at MIL power, quickly check for at least a
15 psi increase in oil pressure above idle and that the nozzles are below
30% open. Checking that the nozzles are below 30% ensures that the
start bleed air bands are correctly closed.

ACG-2 D - 48


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_55.jpeg:
MALFUNCTIONS

Starting Emergencies

JFS Ready Light Does Not Come On

If you do not have a JFS ready light within 10 seconds, but the JFS
sounds normal and the AMAD fire light tests normally, then the JFS light
may be inoperative and the start continued. However, the JFS ready light
is necessary to monitor JFS operation while airborne, so have the light
bulb replaced. (The takeoff trim light may be used as a temporary
replacement.)

If the problem is not the light, cycle the JFS switch and ensure that it is in
the ON position. Also, have the crew chief check for any apparent
abnormalities. If everything appears normal, wait 30 seconds and try
another JFS start using the second accumulator.

JFS Fails to Engage or Abnormal Engagement/Disengagement

The first indication that the JFS has failed to engage is no decrease in
JFS whine after the fingerlift has been raised. The most likely causes are
the throttles not full off, dirty switch contacts, master switches not on, an
electrical malfunction or low CGB servicing. Ensure the throttles are full
OFF, cycle the engine master and raise the fingerlift again. If still no
engagement, turn the master switches off and do not attempt another
start.

Once the JFS has engaged (JFS whine decrease) any abnormal sound or
other indication requires immediate JFS shutdown. Shut the throttle off,
turn off the engine master switch and the JFS switch, and give the
aircraft back to maintenance.

Abnormal Engine Start

Anytime the engine fails to light-off within 30 seconds after advancing the
throttle to IDLE, you should place the throttle to OFF and allow the JFS
to windmill the engine for 10 seconds to eliminate any fuel that has
accumulated in the engine during the start attempt. Another start may
be attempted.

D - 49 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_56.jpeg:
If a light-off is obtained, but the engine does not accelerate normally to
IDLE, abort the start by placing the throttle to OFF, the engine master
switch OFF, and the JFS switch OFF, and complete engine shutdown
procedures.

If a light-off is obtained and the engine continues to accelerate above
IDLE, it may be due to a malfunctioning MFC or Nz sensor, or the throttle
may not be connected to the MFC. In any case, every attempt should be
made to cut off fuel to the engine as quickly as possible. Place the throttle
to OFF, press the engine fire light, turn the engine master switch to OFF,
turn the JFS switch off and abort.

When making a normal start, the DEEC directs the MFC to supply lean
fuel flow until 30 seconds after the main generator comes on-line. If the
engine's start schedule is too rich or the engines starting stall margin is
too low, a hot start can occur. You may be able to detect an impending hot
start and shut the engine down before the FTIT starting limit of 680°C is
exceeded. The following are indications that the engine will probably
overtemp if the start is continued:

RPM acceleration simultaneous with or after initial FTIT movement
FTIT above 500°C with rpm below 40%

FTIT rising rapidly through 580°C

RPM stops increasing then decreases while FTIT is stable or increases

In any of these cases, you should place the throttle to OFF and allow the
JFS to windmill the engine until it cools. If the JFS has already
disengaged, allow the engine to wind down below 30% before reengaging
or you will probably shear a starter shaft.

If FTIT did not exceed 680°C, you may attempt another start after
windmilling the engine below 200°C for 10 seconds. Positioning the air
source knob to the engine being started increases the quantity of air being
bled from that engine, thereby increasing its stall margin and should
result in a cooler start. Return the air source knob to BOTH upon
reaching idle.

ACG-2 D- 50


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_57.jpeg:
If FTIT does exceed 680°C, windmill the engine as much as practicable,
place the master switch to OFF, shut down the JFS and abort the
airplane.

Engine Fire During Start (with Fire Light On and/or Voice Warning)

An engine fire is indicated by an illuminated engine fire light and/or a
voice warning of engine fire. In this case, press the fire warning light to
close the bleed air and airframe-mounted fuel shutoff valves. Place the
throttle(s) to OFF, discharge the fire extinguisher, place the engine
master switches to OFF, shut down the JFS and exit the aircraft.

AMAD Fire During Start

AMAD/JFS fires are indicated by illumination of the AMAD fire light,
activation of the voice warning system, or ground crew notification. Push
the AMAD fire light, discharge the fire extinguisher, place the throttles
OFF, place the engine master switches OFF, turn the JFS switch OFF
and exit the aircraft. Additional ground fire extinguishers may be
required if the fire does not go out immediately.

Takeoff Emergencies

Engine Failure on Takeoff

Abnormal noises, airframe or throttle vibrations and a noticeable loss of
thrust generally accompany an engine failure. Depending on type of
failure, it may or may not be preceded by caution/warning displays.
Amount of thrust remaining definitely affects your decision to abort or
takeoff.

If takeoff is continued, use a reduced pitch attitude in the climb. If AB use
on the good engine is necessary, use only enough to maintain safe flight.

Afterburner Failure

When making a max power takeoff, the nozzle position and fuel flow
should be closely monitored to ensure full AB is achieved. Throttles
should be advanced smoothly and continuously to full power without
pausing at MIL or attempting to track AB segmenting. Proper sequencing
through the five segments can be felt as the nozzles progressively step
open. The initial nozzle movement is not as important as how it continues
to open after reaching midrange.

D-51 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_58.jpeg:
If the sequencing slows, stops or reverses when reaching 30-50% open, it
indicates the AB is not lighting properly and the nozzle is closing to
control fan speed. Abnormal nozzle opening may be accompanied by
illumination of the MASTER CAUTION, ENGINE lights and the ENG
CONT caution. The DEEC automatically sequences the system and
makes up to three attempts to relight the AB. If the ENG CONT caution
is on, you may try recycling the ENG CONTR switch and ensure that it is
in the ON position. If the DEEC is unsuccessful in obtaining a light-off
within 12 seconds, recycle the throttle to MIL or below before attempting
further relights.

Engine Fire on Takeoff

Indication is activation of the fire warning light and/or voice warning.

If you decide to abort, push the fire warning light. If the light does not go
out, place the throttle to OFF and discharge the fire extinguisher.

If you decide to continue the takeoff, do not retard the throttle until
reaching a safe altitude. Once safely airborne, the throttle should be
retarded to IDLE and treated as a fire in flight.

In-Flight Emergencies

Inlet Caution On

L INLET or R INLET cautions come on in conjunction with the MASTER
CAUTION and ENGINE lights. This indicates failure of an AIC, improper
position of the ramp, or a diffuser ramp that did not function at the
appropriate Mach. Failure of an AIC may affect the DEEC and some
features in the flight control system. You also see this caution in
conjunction with certain utility hydraulic malfunctions, which you will
learn about in later lessons.

Check to ensure that the appropriate inlet switch(es) is/are in the AUTO
position. If the indication occurs with the switch in the AUTO position,
place the appropriate switch to EMERG and reduce speed to subsonic, but
do not retard throttle to below MIL at speeds above Mach 1.0. Limit
maneuvering to +4.0 to -1.0 G at airspeeds between .95 and .99 Mach.
You do not have an inlet caution indication with the inlet switch(es) in the
EMERG position unless the ramps fail to move to the full up and locked
position, with the diffuser ramp locked up and bypass door closed.

ACG-2 D - 52


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_59.jpeg:
Illumination of the ROLL RATIO and possible RUDR LMTR cautions
along with a failure of the engine RPM to decrease as the throttle is
moved to idle is a probable indication of an AIC malfunction. If this
occurs, reduce airspeed to below Mach 1 and turn the engine control
switch off.

Oil System Malfunction

Illumination of the MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights accompanied
by an OIL PRESS LOW caution only occurs with low oil pressure. Other
oil system malfunctions, such as excessive fluctuations or high oil pressure
will only be noted by reference to the EMD or the engine display on an
MPD/MPCD.

If such indications occur, place the bad engine in IDLE to see if pressure
can be maintained above 8 or below 100 psi. If not, shut the engine down
(conditions permitting) and make a single engine landing as soon as
practicable.

Engine Control Malfunction

Illumination of the MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights along with
an L/R ENG CONTR caution displayed on the MPD/MPCD indicate that
the DEEC has lost one or more of the signals required for it to operate
properly and/or it has switched to secondary mode (MFC scheduling
engine variables). If the L/R ENG CONTR caution is on and the
accompanying nozzle indication is less than 5%, assume that the engine is
operating in the secondary mode. Afterburner operation is inhibited and
80-100% of normal military thrust is available.

If supersonic, retard throttle to MIL and slow to subsonic. When subsonic,
set throttle to match actual engine operating parameters set by the MFC
(this will be between 80-85% rpm), and cycle the engine control switch ON
to OFF to ON. With the ENG CONTR switch ON and the ENG CONTR
light on, the engine may still be operating in the primary control mode.
This condition may provide improved operation over the secondary mode.
However, if engine operation is unsatisfactory, place the engine control
switch OFF and land as soon as practical. Gear down idle thrust will be
greater than normal. After landing, shut down the engine to reduce taxi
speed (if required).

D - 53 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-2 C-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_60.jpeg:
Engine Fails to Respond to Throttle Commands

If an engine is stuck at MIL or above, placing the appropriate engine
control switch off will provide 80-100% MIL thrust. If the engine is stuck
above idle, approach speeds and landing rollouts may be excessive due to
the extra thrust. Shutdown of the nonresponsive engine may be required.
If the throttle does not shut down the engine, try the appropriate engine
fire light. The engine may overtemp if the fire light is used to shut down
the engine. Be prepared for flight control transients as the engine winds
down to 0 rpm.

Nozzle Failure

The cockpit nozzle indicator indicates nozzle control unit commands, not
actual nozzle position. It is possible for the nozzle to fail open or closed
and still have normal cockpit indications. Engine stall when selecting
afterburner may be an indication of a nozzle failed closed. Gear down idle
thrust will be greater than normal with the nozzle failed closed. A loss of
thrust and lower than normal FTIT and rpm at MIL may be an indication
of a nozzle failed open or missing. If the nozzle is failed closed, leave
engine control switch on and do not exceed MIL power. If the nozzle is
failed open or missing, leave the engine control switch on and place the
affected throttle to idle. The throttle should remain at idle unless
required to maintain flight. An auto-transfer to secondary mode may
occur and FTIT may exceed limits with the throttle at MIL. Engine
operation above 850° C FTIT may cause engine failure when operating in
secondary mode with a nozzle failed open or missing. If required to
maintain flight, maximum thrust can be achieved by advancing the
throttle to MIL power in secondary mode.

AMAD Failure

AMAD failure is indicated by simultaneous loss of the entire PC system,
the utility pump and the generator on the same side. This is accompanied
by illumination of the MASTER CAUTION, HYD and generator lights,
with the appropriate cautions displayed on the MPD/MPCD.

The operating AMAD is sufficient to operate all system requirements;
however, you should reduce electrical requirements as much as possible to
reduce the load on the good generator. In addition, the appropriate
throttle should be placed in IDLE to limit any further damage, and you
should discontinue your mission and land as soon as practicable.

ACG-2 D- 54


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_61.jpeg:
Double AMAD Failure

Kyject!

AMAD Fire In Flight

Indications of an AMAD fire are illumination of the AMAD fire light and
activation of the voice warning. It may also be accompanied by electrical
problems or abnormal electrical indications.

Most probable cause of an in-flight AMAD fire is a generator malfunction.
If you are already experiencing problems with one of the generators,
simply turning that generator OFF may eliminate the AMAD fire. If not,
push the AMAD fire light, discharge the fire bottle and land as soon as
conditions permit. If the fire persists, switch the emergency generator to
MANUAL and turn one generator OFF at a time and try to locate the
generator causing the fire. As with an engine fire, always test the circuit
if the fire light goes out to ensure that the circuit is still working and has
not simply been burned through.

Engine Stall/Stagnation

Most stalls are associated with afterburner use. They are normally
accompanied by an audible pop, bang or thud, but may occur without
audible warning. This may be your only indication that a stall has
occurred since most stalls are self-clearing or cleared by DEEC logic.

More severe stalls/stagnations are indicated by rapidly increasing FTIT,
decreasing rpm, opening nozzles and lack of throttle response. If your
attention is focused outside the cockpit, and no audible indication is noted,
your first indication may be a MASTER CAUTION, ENGINE light, along
with GEN OUT and EMER BST ON caution displays.

D-55 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_62.jpeg:
The throttle should be rapidly chopped to MIL if in AB and then to IDLE
if the stall does not clear. If you were not operating in AB when the stall
occurred, chop the throttle to IDLE right away. Check the engine heat
switch off. If FTIT cannot be controlled, shut down the engine and
perform an airstart. If FTIT has not exceeded 1000°C, normal engine
operation limits apply. If FTIT exceeded 1000°C, the engine may be
restarted to provide redundant hydraulic and electrical power, but you
should terminate the mission, leave the throttle in IDLE (unless needed
for safe flight) and return to base. Stalls may also be caused when the
ENG HEAT switch is on. The mission may be continued with the switch
OFF, if conditions permit. However, if subsequent stalls occur, follow
normal stall procedures and land as soon as practical.

Restart

In the F-15E, fuel and ignition are continuously available when the
throttles are at IDLE or above. Restarts are generally required only
because an engine has been shut down for some reason. If an engine must
be shut down, a spooldown restart (rpm 30-50%) results in the fastest
restart. If rpm is allowed to unwind to 12% or below, high airspeeds (up
to 450 KCAS) may be required to accelerate the engine, or a JFS air start
may be required. If the rpm drops below 12%, the DEEC may transfer to
the secondary control mode and the ENG CONTR caution may come on.
Once rpm increases above 12%, the DEEC will resume primary control
and the caution will go out if the engine control switch was left on.

Indications of a normal airstart are similar to a ground start, except that
you may notice FTIT decrease after it increases several times before the
engine reaches IDLE rpm. In addition, it may take 2 minutes to achieve a
successful start above 35,000 feet and at slow airspeeds. An unsuccessful
restart is indicated by a steady decrease in rpm or FTIT increasing
through 800°C with rpm hung or decreasing. Consider a secondary mode
(SEC) start (ENG CONTR switch OFF). Start procedures for a primary or
secondary start are the same; however, a higher airspeed is required for
secondary starts. Restart time for a secondary start ranges from 30
seconds at sea level to 60 seconds above 30,000 feet.

ACG-2 D - 56


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_63.jpeg:
Double Engine Stall/Stagnation/Failure

If altitude permits, immediately lower the nose to maintain/achieve 350
knots. Check FTIT and rpm to determine whether the engines are flamed
out or stagnated. If they are flamed out, rpm and FTIT decrease equally.
If they are stagnated, rpm decreases while FTIT increases. If the
flameouts are caused by fuel starvation, they may restart. If the engines
are stagnated, they must be shut down and restarted. Check engine heat
switch off. Shut down the right engine first unless FTIT exceeds 1000°C.
If 1000°C is exceeded, shut down the engine with the lower FTIT. Your
most immediate concern is to maintain enough airspeed to keep the
engines windmilling fast enough to produce hydraulic pressure to the
flight controls. A single engine at about 18%, or both engines at 12%, will
power the flight controls and emergency generator. This requires an
airspeed of approximately 350 KCAS, which can be maintained with a
10° dive. At much slower speeds, a momentary steep dive may be
required to rapidly attain 350 KCAS. Once steady state rpm is
established, excessive airspeed/dive angle reduces time available for
restart.

You can expect the engine left in stagnation to be extensively damaged
and may not restart if temperatures are above 1000°C. Therefore, do not
shut down the second engine until a restart is indicated on the first
engine. If imminent loss of control is indicated by loss of the emergency
generator and/or PC system dropping to 0-EJECT.

D-57 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_64.jpeg:
JFS Assisted Restart

The JFS may be used to assist an airstart attempt when other attempts
have failed or are considered impractical. This procedure takes more time
than a normal restart attempt; therefore, consideration should be given to
the safe ejection envelope prior to starting the procedure. In addition, the
jettison of anything on the centerline may be required because it disrupts
airflow to the JFS at most altitudes and airspeeds, and severely restricts
the envelope in which the JFS can be started successfully (Figure D-21).

ALTITUDE - 1000 FEET

PROBABLE HOT STAR

LEGEND
[_] CLEAN CENTERLINE ONLY

i CLEAN CENTERLINE OR
CENTERLINE PYLON INSTALLED
(WITH OR WITHOUT STORES)

DUE TO POSSIBLE MAIN ENGINE
* HOT START, JFS ASSISTED ENGINE
START NOT RECOMMENDED 0 100 *200 300 400 500

BELOW 200 KNOTS AIRSPEED - KCAS

ACG-02-21

Figure D - 21. JFS Assisted Restart Envelope.

Maintain one engine at 18% or above (even in stagnation) throughout the
procedure to power flight controls and the emergency generator. Start the
JFS just as in the ground start procedure. If either engine is to be shut
down with the JFS running, release the fingerlift before reaching the
CUTOFF position, and use care not to engage the JFS to an engine
rotating above 30% rpm since this will probably shear the starter shaft.
When starting the engine, place the throttle to MID RANGE rather than
to IDLE to allow a smooth and continuous acceleration to a useful power
setting.

ACG-2 D - 58


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_65.jpeg:
Engine Fire In Flight

Engine fire is normally indicated by illumination of a fire warning light,
activation of the voice warning, muffled thumps, vibrations and/or erratic
engine data readings. Due to the location of the fire sensor loops, fire in
the aft portion of the AB or nozzles may not be detected by the engine fire
warning system. In this case, you may get the L(R) BURN THRU light
and voice warning, which should extinguish in 30 seconds after placing
the throttle to IDLE.

Reducing the throttle to IDLE often causes the fire to go out within a few
seconds. If the fire light goes out, test the fire circuit to ensure it is still
working and, if so, leave the throttle in IDLE and land as soon as
conditions permit.

If the initial throttle reduction is not effective, push the fire warning light
to cut off fuel flow outside the engine bay, place the throttle to OFF to
shut off fuel flow at the engine, and then discharge the fire bottle. Once
again, any time the fire light goes out, test the warning system and
continue to monitor other fire indications while attempting to get the
aircraft on the ground as soon as practicable.

Afterburner Burn-Through

If the left or right afterburner burn-through lights come on/the voice
warning is heard, retard the throttles to MIL or below.

Single Engine Operation

The aircraft has excellent single engine handling characteristics. Best
single engine cruise is approximated by climbing at 250 KCAS until rate
of climb stops. Accelerate to 0.6 Mach in MIL and then cruise climb as
fuel weight decreases. Refer to single engine landing.

D-59 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_66.jpeg:
Landing Emergencies

Single Engine Operation

System redundancy allows the aircraft to operate normally on a single
engine, and sufficient power is available for flight. However, to avoid
relying totally on one system for electrics and hydraulics, consider leaving
the bad engine at IDLE if it is feasible and safe. Some yawing moment is
evident during single engine operation, which becomes more pronounced
at higher power settings. Therefore, avoid situations that would require
high thrust settings on the operating engine.

When you study hydraulics, you will learn about the operation of the
hydraulic switchover valves that provide system redundancy for flight
control operation. For now, if operating with a windmilling engine,
monitor hydraulic pressure and avoid flying at an airspeed that produces
fluctuations between 800-2000 psi. It is in this range that the hydraulic
switchover valves operate. If allowed to fluctuate back and forth, it may
produce repeated flight control transients, reduced control sensitivity,
momentary split flaps and CAS disengagements.

ACG-2 D - 60


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_67.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

Analyze the following malfunctions:

1.

Indication: While starting the right engine, it stabilizes momentarily
at 23% rpm and then FTIT begins to increase followed by increasing

rpm.

a. Analysis:
b. Effects:
ec. Action:

Indication: After initiating full AB, a muffled thump is heard and you

notice the following:

L
63% and decreasing
980° and increasing
80% and increasing

a. Analysis:
b. Effects:
ec. Action:

Engine
RPM
FTIT

Nozzle

R
96% and stable
910° and stable
95% and stable

ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_68.jpeg:
3. Indication: Assume both throttles are at MIL and the right engine
control caution is on.

ENGINE

RPM %

ENGINE L TEMP °C

FF
PPH

RPM% 93
TEMP C 920
FF/PPH 9800
NOZ POS% 15
OIL PSI 75

CRUISE DATA
RANGE NM 900
TIME HRS:MIN 2:14
COMMAND ALT KFT 30
COMMAND MACH 0.75

OIL PSI

END
FUEL

oo

ACG-02-22

Figure D - 22.

a. Analysis:
b. Effects:
ec. Action:

ACG-2 D - 62


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_69.jpeg:
4.

Indication:

DISCHARGE

TEST

AMAD

+

(2 |
i
(+)

ENGINE
RPM %
TEMP °C
FF
PPH
NOZ
POS

%

OIL PSI

R

L ENGINE R
i

CE) eile =
SB amcor!” |

R
BURN THRU

"WARNING, ENGINE FIRE, RIGHT!"

"WARNING, ENGINE FIRE, RIGHT!"

Figure D - 23.
a. Analysis:
b. Effects:
Action:
If light goes out:
If light does not go out:
D - 68

ACG-02-23

ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT
INTRODUCTION

The F-15E (prior to tail number 90-0233) is powered by two Pratt and
Whitney F100-PW-220 turbofan engines. This lesson will mostly cover the
F100-PW-220 engine (sometimes called PW-220 or just -220). Kach
engine produces 14,500 pounds of thrust in MIL and 24,000 pounds of
thrust in MAX AB. The -220 features a variety of improvements over
previous engines. The most significant improvements are a digital
electronic engine control, increased engine core life, improved afterburner
and an engine monitoring system.

BYPASS DUCT
TURBOFAN ENGINE

COMPRESSOR TURBINE
AL

TURBOJET ENGINE

ACG-02-01

Figure D - 1. Turbofan versus Turbojet.
THE TURBOFAN ENGINE

The turbofan engine draws more air than it requires for ignition. The air
is split between the engine core and a bypass duct at the front of the
engine (Figure D-1). Bypass air helps cool the engine core and provides
high-performance AB operation and extra thrust. Turbofan engines have
two independently rotating turbines allowing each turbine compressor
section to rotate at its optimum speed and provide high pressure output.

D-1 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_70.jpeg:
1. Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

2. Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

ACG-2

ANSWERS
Abnormal engine start

Probable hot start if allowed to continue because FTIT
started increasing before rpm.

Throttle - OFF

Allow the JFS to windmill the engine until it cools to
below 200°C, wait 10 seconds, place the air source knob
to the right engine, then go throttle idle to attempt
another start.

Left engine stall/stagnation

Left engine has already exceeded operating limits and
will probably exceed 1000°C. Expect voice warning to
activate and possible engine damage due to overtemp.

Chop throttle to MIL. If stall clears, place throttle in
IDLE, terminate your mission and return to base.

If stall does not clear:
Chop throttle to IDLE. If stall still does not clear, shut

the engine down and perform an airstart and leave the
throttle in IDLE.


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_71.jpeg:
3. Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

4. Indication:

Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

Right engine control malfunction—probable secondary
operation.

Right engine has switched to secondary mode and MFC is
scheduling engine variables. MIL thrust will be 80-100%
of normal MIL thrust, and use of AB is prevented.

Set throttle to 80-85% and cycle engine control switch
from ON to OFF to ON. If DEEC returns to normal
operation, continue. If DEEC does not reset, leave the
switch on. If the DEEC resets but engine operation is
unsatisfactory, place the engine control switch to OFF.
Land as soon as practical if normal DEEC operation is
not attainable.

Right engine fire

Loss of right engine. If fire cannot be controlled, ejection
and loss of aircraft are inevitable.

Throttle-IDLE

If light goes out: Test warning circuit. If it tests good,
leave throttle in IDLE and land at the nearest suitable
airfield.

If light does not go out: Fire warning light-PUSH;
Throttle—OFF; Fire extinguisher-DISCHARGE

If the light now goes out, test the warning circuit,
terminate your mission, monitor other fire indications

closely and land at the nearest suitable airfield.

If fire persists—Kject.

D - 65 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_72.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-2 D - 66


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_73.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The F100-PW-220 engine is referred to as being “twin spooled”
because of the independent function of the Ni turbine powering the

ao op

and the N2 turbine powering the

bypass air, fan
compressor, bypass air
compressor, fan

fan, compressor

Cockpit indications that a DEEC has switched to secondary mode
and that the MFC is controlling engine variables are:

a.

b.

MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights, L/R DEEC FAIL
caution, and rpm 80%-85%.
MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights, L/R INLET caution,
and nozzle 100%.
MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights, L/R ENG CONTR
caution, nozzle 100%, and rpm 80%-85%.

MASTER CAUTION and ENGINE lights, L/R ENG CONTR
caution, nozzle less than 5%, and 80-100% thrust when MIL is
selected.

The rpm portion of the engine monitor display (EMD) displays:

ao oP

Ne rpm.
Ni rpm.
twin-spool rpm.
fan rpm.

Maximum FTIT for engine start on the ground is

ao oP

500°C.
680°C.
800°C.
980°C.

E-1 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_74.jpeg:
5. With the inlet ramp switches in the AUTO position, the ramps will

a. receive anti-ice heating anytime the gear handle is in the UP
position.

b. be positioned by signals provided by the air inlet controller
(AIC).

c. be positioned full up during ground operations.

d. be positioned as a function of angle-of-attack.

6. Which of the following is true of the engine oil system?

a. Ojilis supplied to the main pump element via engine rotation.

b. Return of engine oil to the pump reservoir is unaffected by
flight conditions.

c. Oilis supplied to the main pump element via an oil boost pump.

d. Each engine has a self-contained oil system.

7. | Which of the following is true of the JFS?

It cannot start both engines simultaneously.

It supplies full power to the aircraft electrical system.

It always supplies power directly to the right and left AMADs.
It shuts down when the first engine reaches approximately 50%
rpm.

pe op

8. The engine fire lights are operable

anytime at least emergency generator power is available.
anytime the JFS is running.

only when main generator or ground power is available.
anytime battery power is available.

ao oP

ACG-2 E-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_75.jpeg:
10.

After the second engine has been started during a normal engine
start procedure, the JFS starter switch

should be placed in the OFF position.

should be left in the ON position.

automatically trips to the OFF position.

should be placed in the OFF position to shut down the JFS, and
then to the ON position so the JFS will be ready for immediate
start in an emergency.

Boop

You are attempting a JFS assisted restart after a stagnation. What
is the maximum windmilling rpm allowed to engage the JFS without
risk of shearing the CGB shaft?

ae op
Iw)
So

E-3 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_76.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-2 E-4


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_77.jpeg:
AB
AIC
AMAD
CGB
CIVV
DCU
DEEC
DTM
EDU
EMD
FTIT
HOTAS
JFS
LOD
MFC
pph

RCVV

GLOSSARY
Afterburner
Air inlet controller
Airframe mounted accessory drive
Central gear box
Compressor inlet variable vanes
Data collection unit
Digital electronic engine control
Data transfer module
Engine diagnostic unit
Engine monitor display
Fan turbine inlet temperature
Hands on throttles and stick
Jet fuel starter
Light-off detector
Main fuel control
Pounds per hour

Rear compressor variable vanes

F-1 ACG-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_78.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-2 F-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_8.jpeg:
Turbojet (non-bypass) engines provide considerably less thrust increase in
AB over MIL and lower pressure output power than turbofan engines.
However, improved performance comes at the expense of slower response
to throttle increases, especially at high altitude. Also, the turbofan is
more susceptible to compressor stall and engine stagnation than
non-turbofan engines.

MAJOR COMPONENTS

The F100-PW-220 engines have six major sections or modular
components. They are the fan, compressor, combustion chamber,
turbines, afterburner and the variable nozzles (Figure D-2).

TURBINE VARIABLE
FAN COMPRESSOR N N 4 AFTERBURNER NOZZLES

CIVV

BYPASS DUCT

COMBUSTION
CHAMBER
ACG-02-02

Figure D - 2. F100-PW-220 Engine.

Fan Section

The first major component of the engine is the fan section (low pressure
compressor). The three stage fan draws in a large quantity of air and
begins to compress it. The compressor inlet variable vanes (CIVV) are in
front of the three stage fan and are variable in pitch to minimize airflow
turbulence within the engine. Once the air is past the fan section, the
flow dividers split the airflow and direct most of it (60%) through the main
compressor section and into the combustion chamber. The remaining air
(40%) flows around (bypasses) the engine and is routed into the
afterburner section.

ACG-2 D-2


Text from ACG-2_Propulsion_System_page_9.jpeg:
Compressor Section

The second major engine section is the compressor (rear or high pressure
compressor). It consists of ten stages of stators and rotors that further
compress the air coming into the engine prior to entering the combustion
section. The first three stages of the compressor have variable vanes
called the rear compressor variable vanes (RCVV) (Figure D-2). They help
prevent turbulent air entering the section from stalling the compressor.

Combustion Section

The third section is the combustion section, consisting of a continuous
combuster mounted circularly around the engine. Compressed air is fed
into this section and mixed with the proper amount of fuel in the
combustion section where it is ignited. Ignition is provided by two igniter
plugs per engine. The igniter plugs are powered by their own small
engine mounted generator and operate continuously when the throttles
are out of the CUTOFF position (i.e., continuous ignition). High velocity
exhaust gas is then vectored rearward through the turbine section.

Turbine Section

The turbine is the component providing the power to keep the engine
operating. The PW-220 has two independent, two-stage turbines. One of
these is connected to the fan while the other is connected to the
compressor (“twin-spooled”). They are numbered Ni and Nz2 respectively.
Note in Figure D-2 that although the Ni turbine powers the front-most
part of the engine, and is therefore numbered first, it is actually located
aft of the N2 turbine. The speed of the Ni turbine, and therefore the speed
of the fan, is controlled by back pressure in the engine. The aircrew has
no direct control over the Ni turbine, and no cockpit indications are
provided to indicate its rotation speed. What the aircrew controls through
the throttle is the rotation speed of the Nz turbine and, consequently, the
compressor.

D-3 ACG-2


