Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIRCRAFT GENERAL
ACG-6
HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS

AUGUST 1999

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_10.jpeg:
Power Sources

The system uses four interchangeable hydraulic pump assemblies driven
by the left and right AMADs. One pump is provided for each of the PC
systems and two pumps are provided for the utility system. Figure D-4
shows that the left AMAD drives the PC1 and left utility pumps. The
right AMAD drives the PC2 and right utility pumps.

The PC1 and PC2 pumps pressurize their own separate reservoirs.
Pressure from the left and right utility pumps are combined to pressurize
one common utility reservoir.

The PC1/2 and left utility pumps operate at a pressure of 3000 +250 psi;
the right utility pump operates at 2775 +225 psi. The slightly lower
pressure for the right pump reduces resonation between the pumps during
dual pump operation. Crew members use the difference in pressure to
help verify the operation of both pumps through a single gauge.

PC1 RESERVOIR UTL RESERVOIR PC2 RESERVOIR

A NON-RLS B
CIRCUIT | | CIRCUIT | | CIRCUIT

Figure D - 4. F-15E Hydraulic System.

ACG-06-04

Notice in Figure D-4 that each PC system is further divided into two
separate circuits (A and B), and that the utility system is divided into
three separate circuits (A, B and non-RLS). In all of the circuits except
UTL non-RLS, the reservoir level sensing (RLS) system functions to
isolate circuit leaks.

ACG-6 D-4


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_11.jpeg:
FLIGHT CONTROL HYDRAULICS

Figure D-5 shows that it is the B circuits of the PC1 and PC2 systems that
are primarily responsible for powering the left and right flight controls,
respectively. The A circuit of each system crosses over to share the
operating load of the opposite stabilator through a dual system actuator.
If one PC system is totally lost, the opposite PC system continues to
provide stabilator control.

PC UTILITY PC 2
L AMAD L&R AMAD PUMPS R AMAD PUMP

1
PUMP

RIGHT
i STABILATOR
RIGHT
RUDDER

ACG-06-05

Figure D - 5. Flight Control Hydraulics.

Figure D-5 also shows how the utility system provides backup for both PC
systems. UTL A backs up the left wing (aileron and flap), while UTL B
performs the same backup function for the right wing. UTL non-RLS
provides a backup for the tail (stabilator and rudders), but does not power
ailerons and flaps. Note that UTL A also powers a function known as the
control stick boost/pitch compensator (CSBPC)—an important part of the
flight control “feel” system. You will learn more about the CSBPC in the
course on flight controls, but for now, suffice it to say it is important
enough to require a backup source of power in case the UTL A circuit is
lost. That backup source of power is PC2 A.

D-5 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_12.jpeg:
Reservoir Level Sensing

Figure D-6 depicts how the RLS system functions when a leak occurs.
When the fluid level of a reservoir begins to drop, circuit A is shut off in an
attempt to isolate the leak. If the leak is in circuit A, no further action
occurs. If the leak is in circuit B, the reservoir level continues to fall,
causing RLS to restore circuit A and shut off circuit B. The hydraulic fluid
level stabilizes and the leak is successfully isolated.

The non-RLS circuit of the utility system, however, has no RLS protection.
If this circuit were to develop a leak, RLS would respond as described,
first shutting off circuit A, then restoring A and shutting off B. Since this
leak cannot be isolated, if the flight is continued, the fluid level will
continue to drop until the reservoir is depleted and complete utility failure
occurs. (Cockpit indications of this failure are UTL A followed by UTL B,
followed by L PUMP and R PUMP caution.)

CIRCUIT CIRCUIT

LEAK OCCURS LEAK ISOLATED
e FLUID LEVEL FALLS ¢ ROD TRIPS CIRCUIT "B"
¢ PISTON ISOLATES ¢ CIRCUIT A RESTORED
BUT "A" BY TRIP BY ROCKER ARM
¢ PRESSURE SENSOR
e PRESSURE SENSOR PROVIDES CIRCUIT "B"
PROVIDES CIRCUIT "A" CAUTION ON DISPLAYS

CAUTION ON DISPLAYS

e FLUID CONTINUES
FALL (LEAK NOT IN Te CIRCUIT) ACG-06-06

Figure D - 6. Reservoir Level Sensing.

ACG-6 D-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_13.jpeg:
Return Pressure Sensing (RPS) Switchover Valves

The F-15E incorporates a number of RPS switchover valves, which are an
important part of the hydraulic system because they enable one system or
circuit to serve as backup for another. RPS switchover valves, depicted in
Figure D-5, monitor the hydraulic pressure in the primary circuits. As
long as that pressure is within limits, everything functions normally.

If the pressure drops in a primary circuit, the RPS switchover valve
detects it and initiates the sequence for switching over to the backup
system. This loss of pressure could be due to a leak or loss of a pump. To
avoid loss of the backup, the RPS tests the line downstream of its location
to see if pressure can be maintained. This is done by initially allowing
only a low volume flow of fluid from the backup circuit. If the line
downstream is not damaged or leaking, the return pressure remains
within limits and the valve completes the switchover to a full volume flow
of the backup system. If pressure cannot be maintained, the valve does
not allow a full switchover, but retains a low volume flow. This means the
backup system will also leak, but at a reduced rate, and the backup
system RLS will kick in and shut down the affected circuit.

D-7 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_14.jpeg:
HYDRAULIC INDICATORS
Cockpit Pressure Indicators

Three hydraulic pressure indicators are located in the upper right corner
of the main instrument panel in the front cockpit (Figure D-7). These
indicators display UTIL, PC1 and PC2 hydraulic system pressure. Notice
that although the utility system has two pumps, there is only one pressure
indicator. A main generator is required to power the indicators.

ACG-06-07

Figure D - 7. Hydraulic Pressure Indicators.

ACG-6 D-8


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_15.jpeg:
You will recall that the normal pressure readings are:

PC1 (pump) 3000 +250 psi
PC2 (pump) 3000 +250 psi
Utility (eft pump) 3000 +250 psi
Utility (right pump) 2775 +225 psi

The Dash 1 contains guidance on abnormal readings. However, keep the
following numbers in mind:

Normal (no system demand) 2750-3250 psi
Normal PC (with rapid control movement) 2000-2750 psi
Requires an aircraft write-up 3250-3400 psi

Maximum 3400 psi

D-9 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_16.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. On Figure D-8, label each of the components of the hydraulic system.

ACG-06-08

Figure D - 8.

2. What is the function of each of the following?

a. Hydraulic pressure indicators:

b. HYD caution light:

c. MPD/MPCD caution displays:

3. What is the function of the reservoir level sensing (RLS) system?

ACG-6 D-10


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_17.jpeg:
NOTE: Refer to Figure D-5 to answer the following questions. (In case of
a hydraulic system malfunction, refer to the checklist, which includes a
similar diagram.)

4. You have just lost PC1 B. What is the backup source of hydraulic
fluid for the left side flight controls?

5. Ifyou completely lose both PC systems, how will your flight controls
be powered?

6. Inan unusual circumstance, you lose PC1 B and UTL A. How are
your flight controls powered? Have you lost any subsystems?

7. On another mission, you lose PC2 A and UTL A. What subsystems
have you lost?

8. List the normal operating pressures for each of these hydraulic

systems:

a. PC1/PC2 Bs psi

b. Utility L PUMP Bs psi
ce. Utility R PUMP + psi

D-11 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_18.jpeg:
ANSWERS

ACG-06-09

Figure D - 9.

a. Hydraulic pressure indicators - Display pressure in the
respective PC1, PC2 and/or utility hydraulic systems.

b. HYD caution light - Comes on when any hydraulic malfunction
is detected in order to direct your attention to hydraulic
indicators and the MPD/MPCD.

c. MPD/MPCD caution displays - Indicate the specific system that
has malfunctioned.

Reservoir level sensing (RLS) - Protects the hydraulic system by
isolating leaks. It works on the principle that a leak developed in the
circuit will cause the reservoir level to drop.

UTL A would power the left aileron and flap while the UTL non-RLS
would power the left rudder and the PC1 B side of the dual actuator
for the left stabilator. PC2 A would continue to power its half of the
left stabilator.

UTL A and UTLB would power the left and right ailerons and flaps
respectively, and UTL non-RLS would power both the left and right
stabilators and rudders. Although only one-half of the stabilator dual
actuators would be powered, this is sufficient to provide complete
control throughout the flight envelope.

ACG-6 D-12


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_19.jpeg:
UTL non-RLS would power the left rudder and half of the left
stabilator dual actuator, while PC2 A would continue to power its
half of the left stabilator dual actuator. However, both primary and
backup systems to the left wing have been lost and you should not
lower the flaps. Any attempt to do so would result in a split flap
configuration. Note that an identical situation would apply to the
right side if, instead, you lost the UTL B circuit in combination with
the PC2 B circuit.

You have lost one-half of the left dual stab actuator, and you have
completely lost the CSBPC function. Although losing half of a dual
stab actuator does not present a problem, losing the CSBPC function
degrades aircraft handling characteristics. This is, therefore, one of
the most serious hydraulic malfunctions.

PC1/PC2 3000 +250 psi
Utility L PUMP 3000 +250 psi
Utility R PUMP 2775 +225 psi

D-13 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E,
its systems, and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be
used in conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and
technical manuals. If you find any differences between the material
contained herein and other governing regulations, adhere to the
regulations and notify the OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC,
275381.

Supersedes: ACG-6, December, 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_20.jpeg:
UTILITY SUBSYSTEMS

In addition to providing a backup source of power for the two PC systems,
the utility hydraulic system is responsible for powering all other hydraulic
systems in the aircraft (Figure D-10). The UTL A circuit powers the
majority of these hydraulic subsystems and the UTL B circuit provides
power to recharge the JFS accumulators, allowing UTL B to back up the
landing gear, brakes and nosewheel steering through the JFS
accumulators. JFS accumulators are also used to start the JFS.

PUMP

=| HOOKRETRACT_| x
[EMERGEN _],
—— Ep
O d
=n sTeerne [11
|

[I CONTROL VALVE
D>] CHECK VALVE

RIGHT INLET

J

a SLIPWAY
|} | SPEED BRAKE
RADAR ANTENNA

JSC CANOPY

>| CANOPY ACCUM

[| |= IL & R PRIM Hx DR
(-220 ENGINES ONLY)

ACG-06-10

Figure D - 10. Utility Hydraulic System.

Landing Gear

The landing gear is one of the major subsystems powered by utility
hydraulics. It is electrically controlled by a switch in the front cockpit and
hydraulically operated through the UTL A circuit. An electronic
weight-on-wheels switch, located on each landing gear strut, prevents the
gear from being retracted on the ground.

The landing gear handle, once raised, moves into a detent to prevent

inadvertent lowering under G-loading. To lower the gear, the handle
must be moved to the right (out of the detent) and down.

ACG-6 D-14


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_21.jpeg:
Three green lights in each cockpit provide down-and-locked indications for
each of the gear. A red light in the gear handle and a red UNSAFE light
in the RCP provide an indication anytime the gear is not in the position
called for by the gear handle. However, the red light is not independent of
the three green lights in the gear down position. The green and red
operate from the same indicator switch on each gear overcenter locking
bar. The red light will go out when the third green comes on. You should
not get three green and a red light nor less than three green with no red
light unless a bulb is out. The bottom line is that a lack of a red light is
not an indication of safe gear down. During the retract cycle, this light
does not go out until all gear doors are up and locked.

A redundant gear down sensor tells the main gear doors to close after the
gear is overcenter locked. Closed main gear doors are an indication of
main gear safe using the normal gear system.
In addition to the position indicators, another guard against gear up
landings is provided in the form of a landing gear warning tone. If all
gear are not down and locked, the tone is activated 10 seconds after the
gear handle is placed down. The volume of the tone is not adjustable. It
also comes on in the landing regime with

° altitude less than 10,000 feet MSL,

e airspeed less than 200 KCAS,

° greater than 250 fpm descent rate and

e —_ gear handle is not down.
These four parameters must be met to activate the tone. Correcting one

silences the tone. Since the tone requires inputs from the air data
computer (ADC), the tone defaults to the ON position if the ADC fails.

D-15 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_22.jpeg:
There is, however, a tone silence button mounted next to the gear handle
which allows the pilot an override feature. A landing gear control circuit
breaker is available to the pilot on the lower portion of the FCP main
instrument panel, next to the air conditioning vent. Ifthe circuit breaker
pops, the warning tone is inoperative; however, the position indicators still
operate normally and the red light will illuminate in the handle even if
the gear is up and locked.

Pulling one of the emergency landing gear handles located on the left
main instrument panel in each cockpit will lower the landing gear in an
emergency (Figure D-11). Pulling the handle interrupts normal hydraulic
and electrical power to the gear and the JFS accumulator pressure
provides emergency hydraulic pressure to unlock the gear and gear doors.
The gear will gravity fall to the down position; yawing the aircraft can
assist in this process to ensure the overcenter downlock is engaged to hold
the gear in the locked position. Even if the gear are all unlocked, they
may not fully extend due to a hydraulic lock. Emergency gear extension
also operates a bypass valve to release all hydraulic pressure and allow
full gravity extension. The gear doors will remain open when using the
emergency system.

The emergency landing gear handle can be reset from the front cockpit
only, by rotating the handle 45° clockwise before pushing in. After
resetting, and with UTL A available, the doors will shut.

ACG-06-11

Figure D - 11. Emergency Landing Gear Handle.

ACG-6 D-16


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_23.jpeg:
Flaps

The F-15E incorporates two-position (up or down) trailing edge flaps with
30° of travel. A switch in the front cockpit electrically controls these flaps
and they are hydraulically operated. The switch is formed in the shape of
a small flap and is located on the outboard side of the FCP throttle
quadrant. Each cockpit contains two flap indicator lights (Figure D-12).
The upper light is yellow (amber) and indicates that the flaps are in
transit. The lower light is green, indicating that the flaps are full down.
Both lights extinguished indicate that the flaps are full up.

ACG-06-12

Figure D - 12. Flap Indicators.

A flap blowup switch protects the flaps from structural damage if they are
inadvertently left down. The blowup switch automatically retracts the
flaps at 250 knots and allows them to extend automatically at no less than
230 knots, provided the flap switch remains down.

D-17 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_24.jpeg:
Wheel Brakes

UTL A hydraulically powers the wheel brakes and rudder pedal toe
pressure operates them. The braking force applied at the main wheels is
directly proportional to the amount of pedal displacement.

A two-position electrical toggle switch on the right side of the FCP lower
main instrument panel activates the holding brake (Figure D-13). When
switched to the ON position, the switch activates a valve to apply a full
3000 psi of hydraulic pressure to the brakes. DO NOT PLACE THE
HOLDING BRAKE TO ON WHILE MOVING. The switch is electrically
held in the ON position and trips off automatically whenever the throttle
is advanced above idle, weight is off the gear, or electrical power is
interrupted. A malfunction in the electrical system can release the brakes
without turning the switch off when advancing the throttles. Should this
occur, the brakes might be on when landing with the throttles at idle. The
proper procedure is to turn the holding brake off rather than depend on
the throttles.

: BRAKE HOLD
eee ON

ACG-06-13

Figure D - 18. Holding Brake Switch.

ACG-6 D-18


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_25.jpeg:
The wheel brakes incorporate an antiskid feature which is capable of
detecting an impending skid and regulates brake pressure to maintain a
controlled (rolling) skid. Antiskid is selectable through a three-position
electrical toggle switch located on the FCP MISC panel, forward of the
throttles (Figure D-14).

ANTI SKID

ACG-06-14

Figure D - 14. Antiskid Switch.

The NORM (forward) position of the antiskid switch selects antiskid
protection when the gear handle is down. This position enables a
touchdown protection circuit which disables brakes until both main
wheels spin up to 50 knots or, if above 50 knots at touchdown (such as
after a bounce), 5 seconds after touchdown. This feature prevents blown
tires if brakes are inadvertently applied during touchdown. The spin up
(50 knots) signal is also used to disable the aileron rudder interconnect
(ARID) and provide better crosswind control during the landing roll.

Failure of the antiskid function causes a caution display on the
MPD/MPCD and illumination of the MASTER CAUTION light with the
gear handle down. If this occurs, the PULSER position should be selected
to ensure ARI disconnect.

D-19 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_26.jpeg:
A malfunction of certain relays or a left main gear down indicator switch
can cause the antiskid warning to illuminate in flight with the gear
handle up and may also show an unsafe left main gear with the gear
down.

The PULSER (middle) position of the antiskid switch causes repeated
interruption of applied brake pressure, and should be used at high speeds
(above 30 knots) if the antiskid has malfunctioned. PULSER was
designed to reduce tire wear and the probability of tire blowout from
locked wheels. However, a blown tire is the likely outcome of braking
with PULSER and all F-15E bases have reported blown tires as a result of
using PULSER. An approach-end cable engagement should be considered.

Another difference is that the aircraft cannot be completely stopped in the
PULSER mode. To stop the aircraft, select the OFF (aft) position when
the aircraft is slowed to normal taxi speed (greater than 30 knots).
Selecting OFF provides manual brakes (i.e., no antiskid protection).

ACG-6 D - 20


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_27.jpeg:
Emergency Brakes

An emergency brake/steering handle is located in each cockpit in the lower
center of the main instrument panel (Figure D-15). When pulled, the JFS
accumulator pressure provides emergency hydraulic pressure to the
brakes. With UTL B operational, emergency hydraulic fluid is
continuously replenished and the accumulators stay charged. However,
even with UTL B inoperative, sufficient reserve fluid is normally available
to bring the aircraft to a stop but the brakes should not be continuously
pumped, as fluid is lost to return lines as the brakes are released.

EMERG BK
“| ADJ

ACG-06-15

Figure D - 15. Emergency Brake/Steering Handle.

Antiskid and PULSER brakes are not available with the emergency brake
handle pulled. If UTL A is operational, resetting the handle restores
normal brakes, and therefore, antiskid/PULSER operation.

CAUTION

Pulling the emergency brake handle
above 70 knots increases the possibility of
blown tires.

Do not pull the handle above 70 knots unless immediately required for
braking or directional control.

D-21 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_28.jpeg:
Nose Gear Steering

Nose gear steering is manually selected with rudder pedal displacement
and hydraulically operated by the UTL A circuit. It is engaged and
operational anytime weight is on the nose gear. Full time nose gear
steering provides between 15-30° of turning authority. For a 45°
maneuvering range of turning authority, depress and hold the nosewheel
steering button on the FCP stick grip.

To select the nose gear steering disconnect feature, depress and hold the
paddle switch on either stick grip. With the disengage feature selected,
the nosewheel becomes free swiveling (360°) and directional control must
be maintained by using differential braking. When the paddle switch is
released, the system does not reengage if the nose gear has rotated more
than approximately 56°. However, if the nose gear steering button is
engaged with the nose gear rotated beyond 45°, the nose gear is
immediately driven back to the 45° position. When centering action
reduces the angle below 45°, the NGS system reengages.

Emergency nose gear steering is available by pulling the emergency
brake/steering handle in either cockpit. JFS accumulator pressure then
provides emergency hydraulic pressure for steering when the handle is
pulled. Both of the normal steering ranges are available; however, the
disengage feature of the paddle switch is not. With the emergency
brake/steering handle pulled, depressing the paddle switch interrupts
UTLA pressure (if present) to the nose gear steering and prevents a
sluggish crossover to emergency pressure. When operating with the
handle pulled, the aircraft should not be taxied if the JFS LOW caution is
observed. If UTLB is available, the emergency hydraulic fluid will be
replenished and keep the JFS accumulators fully charged. If UTL A is
operational, resetting the handle restores normal system operation.

Do not pull the emergency handle above 70 knots unless needed for
immediate directional control, as a possibility of blown tires exists.

ACG-6 D - 22


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_29.jpeg:
Speed Brake

The speed brake is located on top of the fuselage just aft of the canopy. It
is hydraulically operated using UTL A and electrically controlled b a
three-position switch on the right throttle of each cockpit (Figure D-16).

ACG-06-16

Figure D - 16. Speed Brake Switch.

The forward position on the switch retracts the speed brake and the aft
position extends it. A manually selected center position (FCP) stops the
speed brake at any intermediate position between full open or closed. The
FCP switch must be in the center position for the speed brake to remain in
the position selected by the RCP; if not, the speed brake returns to the
position commanded by the FCP when the RCP switch is released. The
RCP switch is spring loaded to the HOLD position. If the RCP switch is
held in the extend or retract position, it overrides the FCP switch position.

Air loads at high speeds (approximately 450 KCAS) may prevent the
speed brake from fully opening, but speed brake extension at any speed
does not adversely affect aircraft handling characteristics. An AOA
interrupt feature prevents extension of the speed brake above 25 units
AOA. If extended, and the AOA is increased above 25 units, the speed
brake automatically retracts to prevent airflow interference to the
stabilators, and then reopens when AOA is reduced below 25 units
provided either switch is still in the aft position.

D - 23 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_3.jpeg:
AIRCRAFT GENERAL

=)

—
Dif —t_t_Wyp y g hon oo

COVER

HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying the F-15E hydraulic system. It
familiarizes you with the components, nomenclature, and operational
characteristics of the hydraulic system, and provides you with knowledge
needed to safely operate the F-15E aircraft.

CONTENTS:

INTRODDUGCTION 6 ces cuss sss sess sen sens sews suns sues sure sens set sews sues sur seins sen seis sess sumn axes « A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........000eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS . 0.00... eeeeeeeeeeee C-1
TEXT oc eecccccceessseecceesseeeecessseeeceessseeeecesssseeeseeessaeeeseessaeeeseeeeaaeeseeea D-1
SPONGY RC esate Ae Wad see ces ane es toe see ce ape ses tas cee se aes: ees arse seas ses ese ee ase: E-1
GLOSSARY. ieee eeccceeseeesscecssneeecesaeeceseecessaeeceseecessaeesesaaeeeesaeeeesnaeeeseas F-1

A-1 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_30.jpeg:
The speed brake defaults to the closed position with either electrical or
UTLA hydraulic failure. In the unlikely event that it should ever fail in
the open position, pulling the speed brake circuit breaker, located on the
center pedestal in the front cockpit, removes electrical power and allows it
to retract.

Arresting Hook

A two-position electric switch on the left subpanel in each cockpit controls
the arresting hook (Figure D-17).

ACG-06-17

Figure D - 17. Arresting Hook Switch.

Selecting the DOWN position of the switch electrically unlocks the hook
and allows it to gravity fall to the down position. A hydraulic dashpot
assists in lowering and holds the hook down to prevent skipping on the
runway. The MASTER CAUTION light and HOOK caution illuminate
whenever the hook is not in the up-and-locked position. The MASTER
CAUTION may be reset, but the HOOK caution remains on the
MPD/MPCD. The UP position of the switch allows the hook to be
retracted and locked, using UTL A hydraulic pressure. The hook comes
down in 2 seconds and retracts in 10 seconds.

AFI 11-2F-15EV3, Chapter 7 requires that the hook be lowered for an
abort if there is any doubt about the ability to stop on the runway. The
4th FW Inflight Guide (page H-1) also lists a requirement to lower the
hook when aborting above 100 KCAS.

ACG-6 D - 24


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_31.jpeg:
QUESTIONS
Which utility circuit powers the majority of the hydraulic

subsystems?

Which utility circuit is responsible for charging the JFS
accumulators?

Under which circumstances will the landing gear warning tone come
on?

What are the two major differences between normal antiskid and
PULSER operation?

During normal operations, how is nose gear steering affected by
depressing the paddle switch in either cockpit?

When can you expect the speed brake to automatically retract and
extend?

Under what circumstances will the HOOK caution be displayed?

D - 25 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_32.jpeg:
ANSWERS
1. The UTLA circuit powers the majority of the hydraulic subsystems.

2. The UTLB circuit charges the JFS accumulators by providing
emergency hydraulic fluid. The JFS accumulators, in turn, provide a
backup pressure to lower the landing gear and operate the nose gear
steering and brakes.

3. The landing gear warning tone will sound 10 seconds after the gear
handle is lowered if the gear are not down and locked. It also sounds
anytime the aircraft is below 10,000 feet MSL, less than 200 knots,
greater than 250 fpm decent rate and if the gear handle is not down.
If the ADC fails, the tone defaults to the ON position. The tone may
be silenced anytime with the gear warning tone silence button (FCP)
or the voice warning/tone silence button in either cockpit.

4. Normal antiskid regulates brake pressure to maintain a controlled
(rolling) skid, whereas PULSER operation repeatedly interrupts
applied brake pressure. The aircraft cannot be completely stopped in
the PULSER mode, and pulser braking has a high possibility of
blown tires.

5. Nose gear steering is disengaged and the nosewheel becomes free
swivelling through 360°.

6. The speed brake will automatically retract whenever AOA exceeds 25
units. It will open again automatically when AOA is reduced below

25 units, if a speed brake switch is still in the aft (open) position.

7. The HOOK caution will be displayed anytime the hook is not up and
locked.

ACG-6 D - 26


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_33.jpeg:
HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MALFUNCTIONS

Thanks to reservoir level sensing, return pressure sensing and built-in
redundancy, hydraulic system malfunctions normally do not present a
serious emergency. However, as with any major system malfunction, they
are cause to terminate your mission and land as soon as practicable
because hydraulic system malfunctions may be an early sign of a more
serious problem. There are only three hydraulic system malfunctions
which require you to complete emergency procedures actions; however,
you should refer to the color coded Hydraulic Flow Diagram - Flight
Controls in your checklist (reproduced in black and white in Figure D-18)
whenever a hydraulic malfunction is detected.

D-27 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_34.jpeg:
PC 1 UTILITY PC 2
L AMAD PUMP L&R AMAD PUMPS R AMAD PUMP

[ FSS
‘SS

RIGHT RIGHT
FLAP AILERON

i LEFT a a RIGHT
STABILATOR : STABILATOR
LEFT CSBPC RIGHT
RUDDER RUDDER
Va
QO SWITCHOVER VALVE

UTIL eR MAD [CONTROL VALVE
UTLA JNORLS | UTLB D>] CHECK VALVE
|

| EMERGEN |
et
G

y

BS

[| |) HOOK RETRACT

LEFT INLET
ANTISKID
BRAKES _

RIGHT INLET

C==[ tear} -$-—t — <
Te steerne 0) a
Csr ere] [rs stanren J

RADAR ANTENNA %y
CANOPY
>] CANOPY ACCUM

[| [== SIL & R PRIM Hx DR
(-220 ENGINES ONLY)

rmcn Ame
DMAWSAV

ACG-06-18

Figure D - 18. Flight Control Hydraulics.

ACG-6 D - 28


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_35.jpeg:
Caution Lights

A major category caution light for the hydraulic system is located in each
cockpit (Figures D-19 and D-20). The light is labeled HYD in both
cockpits. It illuminates anytime a malfunction is detected in a hydraulic
system component and simultaneously illuminates the MASTER
CAUTION light in the FCP and RCP. Resetting the MASTER CAUTION
light in the FCP will not extinguish the HYD caution light or any
associated caution on the MPD/MPCD. Other related caution lights may
illuminate depending on the systems affected.

ACG-06-19

Figure D - 19. Hydraulic Caution Lights (Front Cockpit).

D - 29 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_36.jpeg:
J MSTR
CAUT ©

ACG-06-20

Figure D - 20. Hydraulic Caution Lights (Rear Cockpit).

ACG-6 D - 30


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_37.jpeg:
MPD/MPCD Caution Displays

In addition to the major category caution lights in both cockpits, a specific
system caution is displayed on the right MPD (FCP) or the right MPCD
(RCP) to help you determine what type of malfunction has taken place.

For example, when an RLS valve actuates to shut off a circuit, the affected
circuit is displayed as a caution on the MPD/MPCD; i.e., PC1 A, PC1 B,
PC2 A, PC2 B, UTL A, or UTLB. (Note the PC1 A caution shown in
Figure D-21.)

When a utility hydraulic pump has failed (or output pressure is low), an

L PUMP or R PUMP caution, as appropriate, is displayed. PC pump
failure (or low pressure) is indicated by displaying both PC A and B circuit
cautions, as well as low or zero pressure on the respective PC hydraulic
pressure gauge; since there is only one pump per PC system, a separate
pump caution is not required.

ACG-06-21

Figure D - 21. Hydraulic Caution Display.

D-31 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_38.jpeg:
Although combination or multiple failures of different hydraulic circuits or
systems is not common, they may occur if the aircraft becomes damaged or
if a hydraulic malfunction has occurred and a subsequent emergency
requires an engine to be shut down. Therefore, with any of the following
malfunctions, more cautions or warnings may be displayed than those
listed.

Single Circuit Failure of a PC System

Illumination of the MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights indicates
this malfunction. In addition, the appropriate circuit caution displays on
the MPD/MPCD. There are no changes in the hydraulic pressure
readings.

Due to RLS protection and switchover valves, there are no adverse effects
with this malfunction; however, you should terminate your mission.

Total Failure of a PC System

Illumination of the MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights indicates
this malfunction. The appropriate PC A and PC B cautions display on the
MPD/MPCD, and the appropriate PC pressure reading is low or zero.

Due to system redundancy, there are no adverse effects; however, you
should terminate your mission.

Single Utility Pump Failure

Illumination of the MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights also
indicates this failure. Either L PUMP or R PUMP displays on the
MPD/MPCD. If the right pump has failed, you see no changes on the
hydraulic pressure gauges, but if the left pump has failed, you may see the
utility pressure indicating slightly less than normal (since you are reading
the 2775 +225 psi produced by the right pump).

Since only one pump is required to operate the utility system, there are no
adverse effects; however, you may notice a significant temporary pressure
drop and slower than normal operation of utility systems. Terminate your
mission.

ACG-6 D - 32


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_39.jpeg:
Double Utility Pump Failure (refer to checklist procedure - Total
Utility Failure)

There are several ways to lose total utility pressure: loss of both utility
pumps, one pump and the opposite AMAD or engine, or a leak in the
non-RLS system. You should land as soon as possible, refer to the
Landing Gear Emergency Extension checklist and consider an
approach-end arrestment. Pull the emergency brake/steering handle after
the nosewheel is on the ground. Remember the 70-knot caution to prevent
the possibility of blown tires. Note that this procedure is basically the
same as the UTL A circuit failure below. In an attempt to keep the JFS
accumulators fully charged for emergency braking, it is prudent to
consider lowering the gear when UTL A is available during a non-RLS
leak.

Utility A Circuit Failure (refer to checklist procedure)

This malfunction is the most serious single system hydraulic malfunction
because of the number of systems rendered inoperative. The MASTER
CAUTION and HYD caution lights illuminate and you should see the UTL
A caution displayed on the MPD/MPCD. There should be no change in the
pressure readings. Failure of one of the systems powered by UTL A, such
as the radar antenna or speed brake, may alert you to the malfunction.
With this malfunction, you lose all systems normally powered by UTL A.
These include the left ramp, which moves full up due to air loads (there is
a possibility of compressor stalls at high speeds and/or high angles of
attack), normal landing gear lowering and retraction, slipway door, nose
gear steering, wheel brakes and antiskid, speed brake, radar antenna,
canopy and the ability to raise the hook.

Utility A circuit failure is a checklist emergency and requires you to read
three separate checklists, including UTL A Malfunction, Landing Gear
Emergency Extension, and Approach-End Arrestment. You are then
required to pull the emergency brake/steering handle after the nosewheel
is on the ground.

Utility B Circuit Failure
The MASTER CAUTION illuminates (the HYD light remains on from the

preceding UTL A), then UTL A changes (RLS) to the UTL B caution
display on the MPD/MPCD. There is no change in pressure readings.

D - 33 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the major components and indicators of the hydraulic
system, their functions, and operational characteristics.

2. Identify the operating limitations for the hydraulic system and
hydraulically powered systems.

3. Identify the correct operation of hydraulically powered subsystems in
the normal and backup modes.

4. Given readings on hydraulic-related cockpit displays, identify the
malfunctions and their effect on further operations.

REFERENCES

TO 1F-15E-1

Ath Fighter Wing

Inflight Guide

AFI 11-2F-15EV3

ACG-6

Section I

Section III

Section V

Section A

Section E

Section F

Chapter 7

Hydraulic Systems

Hydraulic Systems
Emergencies

Hydraulic Operating
Limitations
Local/Coordinates
Abnormal Ops
Miscellaneous

Abnormal Operating
Procedures


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_40.jpeg:
You lose the gun drive. The JFS accumulators will no longer be recharged
if used, and the right ramp raises to the full-up position (R INLET light
on) due to air loads.

As long as you do not need to use the gun on the way home, there are no
adverse effects with this malfunction. Terminate the mission and land as
soon as practicable.

Combination Failures

Due to the number of circuits and systems involved, any number of
combination failures may be experienced. You may use the hydraulic
system diagrams to determine what the indications and effects of these

may be, but here are a few of the most serious.

UTL A and PC2 A Failure (refer to checklist procedure)

The MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights illuminate and the
UTLA, PC2 A, LINLET, PITCH RATIO and ROLL RATIO cautions
display on the MPD/MPCD. The pressure gauges do not indicate any
change unless total loss of Utility or PC2 causes the circuit failure. In
addition to losing all the systems covered under UTL A failure, you lose
the CSBPC function; this is what causes the PITCH RATIO and ROLL
RATIO cautions to be displayed. This is a very important part of your
flight control system and its loss degrades aircraft controllability.

UTL A/PC2 A is the third malfunction which requires a checklist
response. It is a serious combination malfunction because of the loss of all
the UTL A systems, combined with aircraft stability problems. If you are
supersonic when this occurs, you should carefully slow to subsonic before
completing checklist procedures. Terminate the mission and land as soon
as practicable. Checklist response is basically the same asin UTLA
failure, but you are required to perform a controllability check prior to
commencing your approach.

UTL A and PC1 B Failure

The MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights illuminate, accompanied
by at least the UTL A, L INLET and PC1 B cautions on the MPD/MPCD.
(Remember, PC1 A must have been seen before the RLS switched to

PC1 B).

ACG-6 D - 34


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_41.jpeg:
Again, you have all the effects of losing UTL A, but if you refer to the
hydraulic diagram, you find that you have also lost both primary and
backup actuation for the left aileron and flap. Any attempt to lower the
flaps results in a split flap configuration.

NOTE: Switchover valves have been known to fail. It is a good idea
anytime you lose a PC B circuit to check if the aileron is working prior to
lowering the flaps. If the switchover valve has failed, a split flap condition
will not show on the MPDs, but you will have one.

You are required to complete all three checklists in the UTL A failure,
plus make a no flap approach and landing. Terminate your mission and

land as soon as practicable.

UTLB and PC2 B Failure

The MASTER CAUTION and HYD caution lights illuminate, along with
UTLB, R INLET and PC2 B cautions on the MPD/MPCD (preceded by
UTL A, L INLET and PC2 A until RLS occurs). You lose the same
systems covered under UTL B failure, and control of the right aileron and
flap.

Terminate the mission and land as soon as practicable. Plan a no flap
approach and landing. Do not attempt to lower the flaps, because this

also results in a split flap configuration.

Leak in Stabilator/Rudder Area

With this malfunction, the MASTER CAUTION and HYD lights come on
with one of the PC A circuit cautions displayed on the MPD/MPCD. The
PC A caution goes out and the same system’s PC B caution replaces it.
The light sequence is due, at first, to the functioning of the RLS system
(PC A followed by PC B cautions). When the PC B caution illuminates
due to zero pressure in that circuit, the switchover valve activates and
depletion of the utility system commences. Since the leak is in the aft
area, the non-RLS is the backup system and complete utility failure is
imminent. Follow checklist procedures for total utility system failure.
Terminate the mission and land as soon as possible. The possibility of a
slow leak is a good reason never to delay returning to base if any
hydraulic circuit is shut down. If practical, the landing gear should be
lowered while UTL B caution is displayed (UTL A restored until total UTL
failure occurs) to preserve fully charged JFS accumulators.

D-35 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_42.jpeg:
Compounded Emergencies

Any number of combinations of emergencies exist that could fail a whole
PC and/or the utility system. Therefore, it is important to understand the
chart in the checklist and determine what is lost. For example, a right
engine failure (that is not windmilling sufficiently to provide hydraulics)
or a right AMAD failure combined with a left utility pump would cause
the loss of all PC2 and all utility pressure. You would lose the CSBPC and
have no flaps on the right wing. PC1 A and PC1 B would be the only
circuits operating but you could still fly. You would not only need to look
at the total utility failure but also at UTL A and PC2 A failures which
refer you to still more checklists.

Now, let us shift our thoughts to the effects of hydraulic system failures on
utility subsystems.

Loss of Directional Control (refer to checklist)

Release the brakes and pull the emergency brake/steering handle.
Depress and hold the paddle switch to prevent sluggish crossover to
emergency hydraulic pressure.

Loss of Brakes (refer to checklist)
Put the hook down in case a cable engagement becomes necessary.

If stopping distance is not critical, turn the antiskid switch to PULSER or
OFF (below 30 KCAS), as appropriate, and retry the brakes. If braking is
not restored, release the brakes and pull the emergency brake/steering
handle, depress and hold the paddle switch and reapply the brakes.

If stopping distance is critical, pull the emergency brake/steering handle
first. Be aware that pulling the handle at speeds above 70 knots can
result in blowing one or both main tires.

Antiskid Malfunctions (refer to checklist)
With landing gear unsafe indications or circuit breaker problems, or
whenever the ANTISKID caution is displayed, assume that the antiskid is

inoperative and place the switch to PULSER (airborne, landing roll,
aborts) or OFF (at taxi speeds of less than 30 knots) as appropriate.

ACG-6 D - 36


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_43.jpeg:
There is no ARI when airborne with the landing gear handle is down
when in PULSER or OFF. Also, remember that you cannot completely
stop the aircraft using PULSER, so turn the switch to OFF when below 30
KCAS on landing roll and for taxi. Using PULSER to stop increases the
probability of blown tires.

Blown Tire During Takeoff (refer to checklist)

If takeoff is discontinued, abort and place the antiskid to PULSER or OFF
as required.

If takeoff is continued, remain below 250 knots and do not retract the
landing gear or flaps (damage from tire debris is possible). Refer to
Landing with Known Blown Tire procedure.

Landing Gear Fails to Retract (refer to checklist)

Anytime the light in the gear handle and/or the red UNSAFE light in the
RCP remain illuminated after gear retraction, remain below 250 knots
and check the circuit breaker in the FCP. Place the gear handle back
down, and if the gear lowers normally, you may elect to attempt another
retraction. If you still have an unsafe indication, place the gear back
down, remain below 250 knots, burn down fuel and land. The usual cause
of this malfunction is landing gear door sequencing, and recycling is an
accepted practice in the F-15.

Speed Brake Failure (refer to checklist)

Pulling the circuit breaker in the FCP removes electrical power and the
speed brake should retract.

Flap Malfunction

Flap malfunction is not a checklist procedure. Ifa split flap condition
exists, attempt to raise the flaps or exceed 250 KCAS to blow them up.
Remember not to attempt to lower flaps with UTL A/PC1 B or

UTL B/PC2 B failure, or a split flap configuration will result. Fly a
straight-in or wide pattern with normal AOA and airspeed on final, but
allow for a higher pitch attitude and slower deceleration. If the CAS is off
the line, a more pronounced rolling tendency will be felt but the aircraft
can still be flown.

D - 37 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_44.jpeg:
Landing Gear Unsafe (refer to checklist)

Check the landing gear circuit breaker in the FCP and ensure you have
not inadvertently turned the warning/caution lights rheostat to dim the
gear indicator lights. Visually confirm gear status with a chase aircraft or
ground observer.

If one or both main gear indicates unsafe, but are visually confirmed down
and the forward main landing gear door is closed, make a normal landing.
Main gear doors only close if the gear is locked down.

If a forward main landing gear door is open, select PULSER and make an
approach-end arrestment cable engagement.

If nose gear indicates unsafe, but is visually confirmed down, leave gear
handle down and make a normal landing.

You cannot use the landing light as an indication of gear down, as it comes
on when the gear handle is down, not gear down and locked.

Due to the uncertainty of the status of the antiskid system, place the
antiskid switch to PULSER.

If you are unable to visually confirm gear status or if the gear appears
unsafe, refer to the Landing Gear Emergency Extension checklist.

Landing Gear Emergency Extension (refer to checklist)

Slow to below 250 KCAS and place the landing gear handle down. Then
pull the emergency gear handle in either cockpit, which bypasses the
normal electrical and hydraulic circuits. The JFS provides accumulator
pressure to emergency hydraulic fluid to open the gear doors and unlock
the gear. This allows the gear to gravity fall to the down position. You
may have to yaw and/or porpoise the aircraft to assist in obtaining a
locked indication. After a locked indication is obtained, reset the
emergency landing gear handle. You should use this procedure even if the
gear is partially extended to release any hydraulic block in the system.

If this procedure fails, attempt to pull the gear circuit breaker to remove
electrical power. If this fails, cycling the gear, if able, may alleviate a

mechanical problem.

If any gear still fails to extend, refer to Landing Gear Emergency Landing
checklist.

ACG-6 D - 38


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_45.jpeg:
Landing Gear Emergency Landing (refer to checklist)

If you have completed all of the above procedures and cannot get the gear
down, consult the checklist chart to determine the correct procedure for
landing with your particular gear configuration. Save enough fuel for at
least two approaches and do not forget to review the considerations at the
top of the chart.

Blown Tire (refer to checklist)

When landing with a known blown main tire, select PULSER on the
antiskid switch. Remember that this disengages ARI with the gear down.
Consider an approach-end arrestment.

Stop straight ahead and wait for the fire department before shutting
down, due to fuel venting overboard and the possibility of it going onto hot
brakes during shutdown.

If a blown main tire happens during landing rollout, place the hook down
as required, select PULSER and use braking on the good tire as required.
Select OFF when less than 30 knots.

For a blown nose tire, hold off the ground as long as possible and remove,
lower or land past the cable.

Approach-End Arrestment (refer to checklist)

Reduce landing weight, but have a game plan for a missed engagement!
Save enough fuel for at least two approaches.

Put the hook down and lock the harness inertia reel.

Touch down at least 800 feet from the cable to allow enough time to lower
the nosewheel to the runway before engagement.

Place throttles to idle, lower the nose immediately after touchdown and
neutralize the stick. Never engage the cable with the nosewheel in the
air, otherwise it can impact violently, causing it to collapse and/or causing
other airframe damage.

Engage the cable in the middle (slightly off center if runway centerline

lights are installed) with feet off the brakes. If you apply the brakes when
crossing the cable, resulting friction may drag the cable and cause it to fall
slack on the runway. If this happens, expect an unsuccessful engagement.

D - 39 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_46.jpeg:
After the aircraft comes to a stop, tension on the cable pulls the aircraft
backwards. Be prepared to control this rollback with power. Do not use
the brakes to stop backward travel as this tips the aircraft
backward onto the tail and may result in a broken hook or
damage to the empennage.

At approach speed, the tail hook is 3 feet below the main gear and
contacts the ground 70-200 feet prior to main gear touchdown. This may
be a factor if landing over raised cables in the overrun.

Departure-End Arrestment (refer to checklist)

Get the hook down early, at least 2000 feet before the departure-end
cable. You are not going to file it off, and you can always raise it again if
you do not need it. Suffice it to say if it looks dicey, you already need to
have the hook down.

Slow down as much as possible, but plan to engage the cable with feet off
the brakes and use the same techniques as listed above.

AFT 11-2F-15EV38, Chapter 7 requires that the hook be lowered for an
abort if there is any doubt about the ability to stop on the runway. The
4th FW Infligth Guide (page H-1) also lists a requirement to lower the
hook when aborting above 100 KCAS. Any abort above 120 KCAS
requires a check for hot brakes.

Hot Brakes (refer to checklist)

If brake overheat is suspected, notify the tower, taxi to the hot brake area
(refer to Inflight Guide, Sections A and E) and head into the wind. Do not
use the holding brake. Release brakes as soon as chocked. Shut down
IAW fire department crew instructions. The fire department may instruct
you to shut down prior to chocking the aircraft. Be prepared to hold the
emergency brakes until the nosewheel is chocked.

ACG-6 D - 40


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_47.jpeg:
Analyze the following hydraulic system malfunctions:

1.

QUESTIONS

Indication:
MASTER CAUTION light
HYD caution light

All pressures normal

R PUMP caution
a. Analysis:
b. Effects:

ec. Action:

Indication:

MASTER CAUTION light
HYD caution light

PC2 pressure 0

PC2 A caution

PC2 B caution

a. Analysis:

b. Effects:

ec. Action:

ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_48.jpeg:
3. Indication:
MASTER CAUTION light
HYD caution light

All pressures normal

UTL A caution
a. Analysis:
b. Effects:

ec. Action:

ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_49.jpeg:
Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

Analysis:

Effects:

Action:

ANSWERS
Right utility pump failure

None, since only one utility pump is required to power the
system.

Reset the MASTER CAUTION light, terminate your
mission and return to base.

Total PC2 failure

None. The RPS switchover valves will activate. The
UTLB circuit will power the right flap and aileron;
UTL non-RLS will power the right stabilator and rudder.

Reset the MASTER CAUTION light, terminate your
mission and return to base.

Utility A circuit failure

All systems powered by UTL A are lost. JFS accumulator
pressure is available to lower gear by emergency method,
and is also available for emergency brakes and steering.
UTLB continuously recharges the JFS accumulators.

Reset the MASTER CAUTION light, terminate your
mission and return to base. Refer to the UTL A Failure
Checklist, Emergency Gear Lowering Checklist, and
Approach-End Arrestment Checklist.

D - 43 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS
1. Read the references in Section I, III, and V of TO 1F-15E-1.

2. Study the information contained in this workbook and complete the
End of Text Quiz.

3. Bring TO 1F-15E-1CL-1 and 4th Fighter Wing Inflight Guide to
class.

C-1 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_50.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-6 D - 44


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_51.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

The F-15E contains three separate hydraulic systems, powered by
interchangeable hydraulic pumps.

Boop
oP © WY

There are ____ hydraulic circuits in the F-15E.

aown
NOD OCP

The only hydraulic circuit without reservoir level sensing is

a. utility non-RLS.
b. PC2B.

c. utility A.

d. utility B.

There are ___ hydraulic pressure gauges in the FCP.

Boop
Rone

Which hydraulic circuit normally powers the wheel brake system?

a. PC2B
b. PCI1A
ce. UTLB
d. UTLA

E-1 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_52.jpeg:
6. Which hydraulic circuit provides backup fluid for the wheel brakes?

a. UTLB
b. UTLA
c. PCLA
d. PC2B

7. Which hydraulic circuit provides backup fluid for the left aileron and

flap?

a. UTLnon-RLS.
b. PC2B.

c UTLB.

d. UTLA.

8. Fifteen to thirty degrees of nose gear steering is normally available,

but with the nose gear steering button depressed, is available.
a. 360°

b. 465°

c. 30°

d. 25°

9. Which hydraulic circuit is required in order to raise the tail hook?

a. UTLnon-RLS
b. UTLA
ec. UTLB
d. PC2B

10. Normal operating pressure of both PC systems is

a. 3400 psi.

b. 3250 +250 psi.
c. 8000 +250 psi.
d. 2775 +225 psi.

ACG-6 E-2


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_53.jpeg:
11. Flaps will automatically blow up at knots if not already

retracted.
a. 230
b. 240
ce. 250
d. 260

12. In flight, you see the MASTER CAUTION, HYD, and R INLET
caution lights illuminate, along with UTL B and PC2 B cautions on
the MPD/MPCD. What systems should you expect to fail?

Gun drive, right inlet, right side flap and aileron
Gun drive, hook retract, left side flap and aileron
Speed brake, antiskid, left side flap and aileron
Left rudder, canopy accumulator and slipway door

no op

13. The MASTER CAUTION and HYD lights illuminate. PC1 and PC2
both indicate 3000 psi; UTL indicates 2775 psi. What is the problem
and how does it affect further operations?

a. Theright UTL pump has failed. You should land as soon as
practical.
. UTLB has failed. You should land as soon as practical.
c. The left UTL pump has failed. You should land as soon as
practical.

E-3 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_54.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-6 E-4


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_55.jpeg:
GLOSSARY

ACC Air Combat Command

ADC Air data computer

AMAD Airframe mounted accessory drive
AOA Angle of attack

ARI Aileron rudder interconnect
CSBPC Control stick boost/pitch compensator
FCP Front cockpit

IDG Integrated drive generator

JFS Jet fuel starter

NGS Nose gear steering

PC Power control

RCP Rear cockpit

RLS Reservoir level sensing

RPS Return pressure sensing

UTL Utility

F-1 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_56.jpeg:
BACK PAGE
COVER SHEET


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-6 C-2


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

HYDRAULIC SYSTEM LAYOUT

Hydraulic power for the F-15E is supplied by three separate, yet
interrelated systems, each normally operating at 3000 psi. Power Control
No. 1 (PC1) provides primary power for the left side flight controls and the
right stabilator through a dual system actuator (Figure D-1).

Sat are ——. A,
\

AILERON

ACG-06-01

Figure D - 1. PC1 - Left Flight Controls, Right Stab.

D-1 ACG-6


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_8.jpeg:
Power Control No. 2 (PC2) provides primary power for the right side flight
controls and left stabilator through its dual system actuator (Figure D-2).
It also backs up the utility hydraulic system in powering the control stick
boost/pitch compensator (CSBPC) (flight control “magic”).

ACG-06-02

Figure D - 2. PC2 - Right Flight Controls, Left Stab.

ACG-6 D-2


Text from ACG-6_Hydraulic_Systems_page_9.jpeg:
The utility system provides primary power to all the hydraulic subsystems
such as landing gear, speed brake, nose gear steering, brakes, antiskid,
canopy, inlets, tail hook retraction, slipway door and backup for the flight
controls (Figure D-3). The utility system also provides primary power for
the control stick boost/pitch compensator, or CSBPC.

SPEED BRAKE
SLIPWAY DOOR

LANDING GEAR
ANTI-SKID BRAKES

NOSE WHEEL
STEERING

ACG-06-03

Figure D - 3. Utility Hydraulically Powered Subsystem.

The three systems are interrelated through a series of switchover valves
so that they are capable of backing each other up in case of system failure.
In fact, any one of the three systems can maintain flight control.

D-3 ACG-6


