Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_1.jpeg:
SUPPORTS COURSES
FIS5EBQ

FISETX

FISESOC

ACADEMIC STUDENT WORKBOOK
F-15E

AIRCRAFT GENERAL
ACG-3
FUEL SYSTEM

NOVEMBER 1998

(SUITE 3 OFP)

AIR COMBAT COMMAND


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_10.jpeg:
External Tanks

These tanks are part of the first level of a three-stage transfer/feed system
(Figure D-2). They use engine bleed air pressure, not pumps, to force fuel
into any internal tank that will accept it. The tanks are interchangeable
and can be carried on wing and centerline stations. They are each
mounted on a pylon that is attached to the aircraft hardpoints. They are
the only tanks that do not have fire suppressant foam or self-sealing
capability. External tanks can be jettisoned regardless of their content
quantity. Because of this capability, the external tanks are called “drop
tanks.”

Conformal Fuel Tanks

The conformal fuel tanks (CFTs) are also part of the first level transfer
system. They transfer fuel by means of transfer pumps (two per tank) to
any internal tank that has room for it. CFTs are divided into three
compartments to ensure the CG moves forward as the fuel is transferred
and are bolted on the outside of each engine nacelle (cannot be jettisoned).
They contain explosion suppressant foam slabs for survivability.

EXTERNAL
TANK FIREWALL

ENGINE FEEDLINES
RIGHT
FEED TANK
(TANK 2)

TANK 1 } TANK

TANK 1
AUX TANK

EXTERNAL _

TANK

ACG-03-02

Figure D - 2. Fuel System Components.

ACG-3 D-4


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_11.jpeg:
Transfer Tanks

The transfer tanks are the second level in the transfer/feed hierarchy.
They are composed of tank 1 and the right and left internal wing tanks
(Figure D-2). A single pump in each tank is used to transfer fuel to either
feed tank that has room for it. These tanks contain fire/explosion
suppressing foam to enhance survivability.

Transfer Pumps

The CFTs, internal wing tanks and tank 1 all contain transfer pumps to
move fuel (Figure D-3). The internal tank pumps normally operate
anytime main generator power is available (or on ground power with an
engine master switch on). The CFT pumps use the same power source
logic, but can be turned on or off with a cockpit fuel control switch on the
fuel control panel. Transfer pumps provide fuel flow to power hydraulic
ejector pumps that ensure that all fuel in the tank 1 auxiliary tank and
the CFT forward compartments is transferred. The internal wing and
tank 1 transfer pumps require main generator power (or ground power).
They will not operate from emergency generator power. The CFT transfer
pumps can be selectively operated from emergency generator power
during special circumstances (covered later).

RIGHT FEED TANK

RIGHT INTERNAL WING
TANK

EXTERNAL EXTERNAL

LEFT INTERNAL

WING TANK ——> '

TO ENGINES

LEFT FEED TANK @ TRANSFER PUMPS

ACG-03-03

Figure D - 3. Transfer Pumps.

D-5 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_12.jpeg:
Fuel Lines

There are two sets of lines running from the internal transfer tanks to the
feed tanks (Figure D-4). In case of transfer pump failure(s), fuel
eventually gravity transfers through the lower line, but not until the fuel
being transferred by the operative fuel transfer pumps and the external
tank/CFT fuel has all been transferred to the feed tanks.

WING TANK FEED
NORMAL LINE (TRANSFER) NORMAL LINE TANK

TANK 1
(TRANSFER)

GRAVITY LINE RIGHT FEED LEFT FEED GRAVITY LINE

Figure D - 4. Fuel Lines.

Feed Tanks

The feed tanks are at the third level of the transfer/feed system (Figure
D-4). The feed tanks provide fuel directly to the engines. Tanks 2 & 3,
normally called the right and left feed tanks, respectively, supply fuel
under pressure to their respective engine. The left feed tank is really
composed of two interconnecting tanks (8A & 3B) but it is most commonly
referred to as a single tank. The JFS gets its fuel from tank 3B. Both
feed tanks are internally baffled so you can sustain negative Gs or
inverted flight for a limited time (7 seconds maximum). The tanks contain
a protective lining that gives them a self-sealing capability if punctured by
a bullet or other small projectile. They also contain fire/explosion
suppressant foam.

ACG-3 D-6


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_13.jpeg:
Boost Pumps

Each feed tank has a boost pump to supply boosted fuel to the engines
(Figure D-5). Without fuel being boosted (pressurized), it may vaporize
and the engines will flameout. The left feed tank also contains the
emergency boost pump, which comes on if the left and/or right main boost
pump malfunctions, a main generator fails or both transformer rectifiers
fail. With any of the above three situations, a system of interconnect and
crossfeed valves open between the left and right feed tanks ensuring both
engines are supplied boosted fuel by the remaining operating boost
pump(s), and the emergency generator will come on and power the
emergency boost pump.

' TANK 4 . RIGHT FEED TANK
YY, RIGHT INTERNAL WING
LC TANK

EXTERNAL @ > EXTERNAL
:

LEFT INTERNAL
WING TANK ————_>

TO ENGINES

LEFT FEED TANK @ BOOST PUMPS

LEFT FEED TANK RIGHT FEED TANK

TO RIGHT
ENGINE

CROSSFEED
VALVE

TO LEFT
ENGINE

INTERCONNECT
VALVES ACG-03-05

Figure D - 5. Boost Pumps (Top and Side Views).

D-7 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_14.jpeg:
Heat Exchangers

There is a radiator-like device in the fuel line between each feed tank and
its respective engine called a heat exchanger. These exchangers routinely
circulate cool fuel around lines containing hot AMAD oil, integrated drive
generator (IDG) oil and hydraulic (PC and utility) fluid (Figure D-6).
Some of the heat is transferred to the fuel, thereby cooling the fluids while
heating the fuel to a more optimum combustion temperature. If the fuel
leaving the exchanger is too hot, a recirculation valve opens and routes a
portion of the fuel back to the internal wing tank for cooling. If the valve
on one side is open, the other valve opens to preclude a possible imbalance
of fuel between the left and right internal wing tanks.

TO PC2 TO AMAD
SYS

FROM RIGHT TO RIGHT
FEED TANK ENGINE
RETURN TO
Jo Mure TO IDG RIGHT WING

ACG-03-06

Figure D - 6. Right Heat Exchanger.

ACG-3 D-8


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_15.jpeg:
SYSTEM OPERATIONS

The fuel system’s primary job is to keep fuel flowing to the engines. It
does this in a three-stage transfer/feed hierarchy (Figure D-7). The
external tanks and CFTs transfer their fuel to any internal tank(s) that
will take it, followed by the internal wing tanks and tank 1 transferring
the fuel to the feed tanks. Fuel is boosted from the feed tanks to the
engines. This design attempts to ensure that the feed tanks are
continuously full (even with fuel transfer malfunctions), unless engine
demand is higher than the fuel transfer rate.

EXTERNALS &
CFTs

TANK 1 &
INTERNAL WINGS

FEED TANKS

ACG-03-07

Figure D - 7. Three Stage System.

Transfer System
External Tanks

External tanks are normally transferred first, assuming the fuel control
switches are positioned appropriately. The fuel is moved exclusively by
engine bleed air pressure, so transfer pump or electrical system failure is
not a factor. The external wing tanks receive a slightly higher pressure
(25 psi) than the centerline tank (15 psi) so they should normally transfer
first. (The aircrew can choose to transfer the centerline tank first through
cockpit fuel control switches). Monitor the appropriate tank(s) as transfer
occurs to detect any transfer malfunction early, before it becomes a

D-9 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_16.jpeg:
significant problem. Be aware, however, that it is not uncommon for the
external wing tanks to transfer at different rates, and even for one to
empty significantly before the other one.

Conformal Fuel Tanks

The CFTs transfer together, normally after the externals go dry or
whenever the internal transfer tanks are not being kept full by the
externals. If this happens, the CFTs can “kick in” and augment the
externals. There are two transfer pumps in each CFT, one in the aft
compartment sump and one in the center compartment sump, which
transfer the fuel in a manner to automatically maintain the proper center
of gravity. The center and aft compartment sumps are connected by a
float-controlled interconnect valve, which isolates the two sumps until the
aft compartment is almost empty or the aft transfer pump fails. The
center pump runs an ejector or “sucker” pump, which empties the forward
compartment into the center compartment. If both CFT transfer pumps
are inoperative, fuel from that CFT cannot be transferred.

NOTE

On aircraft 90-0233 and up, after TCTO 6J14-5-11-521, the ejector pump is
moved to the aft compartment (vice the forward compartment) to aid in

fuel transfer from the aft compartment. The forward compartment gravity
transfers to the center compartment.

Internal Wing Tanks and Tank 1

The internal transfer tanks are normally the last to deplete. Each tank
has one electric transfer pump. Tank 1 also has an ejector pump that
empties its aux tank. After tank 1 transfers its first 200 pounds, tank 1
and each internal wing tank normally transfer fuel at the same rate
pound for pound. Should tank 1 fail to feed, anticipate a forward shift in
aircraft CG as the internal wing tanks empty. This forward CG condition
will increase aircraft departure susceptibility until tank 1 gravity feeds;
which will not happen until the internal wing tanks are empty. Restrict
AOA to below 30 units anytime tank 1 fuel is greater than 750 pounds
more than either internal wing tank.

ACG-3 D-10


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_17.jpeg:
Engine Feed System
Each feed tank provides fuel under boost pump provided pressure to its
respective engine (Figure D-8). After fuel leaves the feed tank, it passes

through a heat exchanger. This interaction keeps the fluids cool while
warming the fuel, which enhances combustion.

TRANSFER FROM
INTERNAL WING
TANKS

:
TO LEFT ENGINE
RIGHT ——
ERIE FEED TANK (3)
CROSSFEED
VALVE
FEED

LEFT EED TANK R

TO BOOST PUMP MAIN INTERCONNECT N
LEFT BoosT VALVES B
ENGINE J PUMP PUMP

Figure D - 8. Feed System.

RIGHT ENGINE
FEED TANK (2)

TRANSFER
1_ FROM
TANK 1

HEAT
EXCHANGERS

The feed system is capable of boosting fuel to both engines unless all three
boost pumps fail. If only one boost pump is working, sufficient pressurized
fuel still goes to both engines but the aircraft operating envelope is
restricted to less than 30,000 feet altitude and nonafterburner operations.
If you experience total boost pump failure, the engines are suction fed and
the probability of one or both engines flaming out is high.

In a single engine situation, the fuel in the feed tank for the inoperative
engine does not feed to the operative engine. In fact, the tank remains full
until the level in the other feed tank reaches FUEL LOW caution
activation. Then the interconnect and crossfeed valves between the feed
tanks open allowing the inoperative engine’s feed tank fuel to be used for

the operating engine.

D-11 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_18.jpeg:
Pressurization and Vent System

Engine bleed air is routed to all tanks (except the CFTs) to provide
positive tank pressure to prevent vaporization/boil-off at altitude (the
CFTs use their own ram air system to do the same thing). Additionally,
the bleed air pressure is used to transfer fuel from the external
wing/centerline tanks. Tank pressurization is a function of the physical
position of the landing gear handle. Normally, pressure is applied with
the handle up and removed with it down.

The internal tanks are vented through right and left wing tip vents. The
CFTs have their own vents and the external tanks are vented through
their respective pylon. The system provides for proper pressure relief
during climbs and vacuum relief during descents.

INDICATORS

Fuel Quantity Indicators

All fuel quantity indications are combined into a gauge in each cockpit
(Figure D-9). The front cockpit gauge is located just above the JFS

handle. The rear cockpit gauge is located on the instrument panel next to
the clock. It is a repeater gauge that displays only internal and total fuel.

ACG-3 D-12


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_19.jpeg:
OTAL LBS
RIGHT

tas (3|2Iolo
0)

TANK |
INTL WING EXT WING
FEED EXT CIR

BIT” \conr

FRONT COCKPIT FUEL QUANTITY INDICATOR

a
LBsx1000 12°

14

18400

TOTAL

REAR COCKPIT FUEL QUANTITY INDICATOR

ACG-03-09

Figure D - 9. Fuel Quantity Indicators.

D-18 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_2.jpeg:
ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION

This student workbook is designed to provide information on the F-15E, its
systems and capabilities. It is not a sole source document, but is to be used in
conjunction with other standard Air Force publications and technical
manuals. If you find any differences between the material contained herein
and other governing regulations, adhere to the regulations and notify the
OPDR.

Changes to this workbook are indicated with a heavy black line in the left
margin.

Forward recommendations for revision or change to 4 TS, SJAFB, NC 27531.

Supersedes: ACG-3, July 1998

OPDR: 4 TS

Index of Changes

Effective Date Pages Affected



Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_20.jpeg:
On the FCP gauge the top scale and pointer indicate total internal fuel (in
thousands of pounds). The digital counter immediately below this shows
total fuel onboard. The two counters labeled LEFT and RIGHT indicate
fuel quantity for the tanks selected on the rotary fuel quantity selector
knob below. When set to EXT CTR or TANK 1, the left counter displays
fuel quantity for that tank and the right counter zeros out. When you
select the BIT position, the pointer and TOTAL LBS counter drive to 6000
and the LEFT and RIGHT counters drive to 600 as a test of the gauge.
The knob must be held in the BIT position.

The FCP fuel quantity indicator also contains the bingo knob and the
bingo index or bug. Together with the BINGO caution indication on the
MPD/MPCD and the voice warning, they serve as a fuel quantity warning
system. Using the bingo knob you can set the bug to any total internal
fuel reminder that you want-bingo, joker, etc. It can also be set above
6000 before initiating the BIT so that the MPD/MPCD caution and voice
warning activation will be tested, as the fuel needle drives below the bug
position. Again, the bingo warning is referenced to total internal fuel.

Both the FCP and RCP fuel gauges will operate off emergency generator

power if main generator power is unavailable. Each gauge has an OFF
flag, which is displayed when electrical power to the gauge is not provided.

ACG-3 D-14


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_21.jpeg:
CONTROLS
Fuel Control Panel

Aside from associated fuel related switches like the engine master
switches, fire push lights and throttles, the ones used to control fuel
system operation are located on the fuel control panel (Figure D-10). The
panel is in the front cockpit just forward and outboard of the throttle

quadrant.

WING CTR CONF TANK
STOP TRANS

“© © wow ©) noe“ ©) W

STOP REFUEL

DUMP

SLIPWAY
ORIDE

®

NORM
CONF TANK | EXT TRANS
EMERG TRANS |_ CONF TANK

WING/CTR CLOSE

ACG-03-10

FRONT COCKPIT

Figure D - 10. Fuel Control Panel.

D-15 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_22.jpeg:
External/Conformal Fuel Tank Control Switches

These three 3-position switches labeled WING, CTR and CONF TANK
control the transfer of fuel to (refueling) and from (transfer) the CFTs and
external tanks during normal fuel transfer and refueling operations
(Figure D-10). The NORM or center position of each switch allows both
transfer and refueling of the associated tank(s). The STOP REFUEL
position prevents the associated tank(s) from being refueled on the ground
or airborne. You must have electrical power for the switches to function.
STOP TRANS stops fuel from transferring from the respective tank(s)
unless the FUEL LOW caution is displayed. The STOP TRANS position
for the conformal tanks turns off the CFT transfer pumps. When this
happens, the valves are automatically opened (regardless of the switch
position) for as long as the fuel low condition exists. Once the feed tanks
are filled above the fuel low sensors, the tanks for which STOP TRANS is
selected will cease transferring until the FUEL LOW reoccurs.

During start and before takeoff ground operations, the CFT control switch
should be positioned to STOP TRANS to prevent the CFTs from venting
fuel on start and to allow the tank 1 fuel to transfer. During the before
takeoff check, the pilot checks tank 1 quantity to ensure tank 1 is
transferring and then positions the CFT control switch to NORM.

ACG-3 D-16


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_23.jpeg:
External Transfer Switch

This two-position switch (Figure D-11) labeled EXT TRANS selects the
priority of either the external tanks or the CFTs to transfer first. If you
choose WING/CTR, the external tanks transfer first, followed by the
CFTs. This is the normal setting if both EXT & CFT tanks are installed.
Placing the switch to CONF TANK allows the CFTs to transfer before the
externals. It is important that the switch position reflects the actual
configuration of the aircraft. If the selected priority tanks (WING/CTR or
CONF TANK) are not installed on the aircraft, the internal fuel will
deplete approximately 1100 pounds; then the nonpriority tanks will fill
the internal tanks. The internal fuel will then deplete 1100 pounds and
the “cyclic” transfer will repeat. If fuel demand is too high for the priority
tank(s), the nonpriority tank(s) will “kick-in” in this cyclic manner in an
attempt to keep the internal tanks full. The fuel quantity sensor, which
provides for this “cyclic” transfer, is located in tank 1. If the tank 1
transfer pump fails, the nonselected system will not transfer until after
the FUEL LOW when tank 1 begins gravity feeding the feed tanks.

CTR CONF TANK
STOP TRANS

NORM NORM © qd )

©

STOP REFUEL

SLIPWAY

NORM

CONF TANK EXT TRANS
EMERG TRANS | CONF TANK

WING/CTR

ACG-03-11

FUEL CONTROL PANEL

Figure D - 11. Fuel Control Switches.

D-17 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_24.jpeg:
Ground Transfer

Fuel transfer during ground operations is the same as airborne transfer,
with one exception. The external tanks do not transfer (because the fuel
system is not pressurized with the gear handle down). Checklist
procedures call for STOP TRANS to be selected during engine
start/ground operations to prevent CFT fuel venting. The pilot should use
this opportunity to ensure that tank 1 fuel is transferring by noting the
decrease in tank 1 fuel (it is not being replenished by either external or
CFT fuel). Engine start and ground operations normally require about
1500 lbs (from tank 1 and internal wing tanks). Tank 1 fuel quantity
should drop about 600 Ibs (from 4000 lbs to about 3400 lbs) and should be
within 500 lbs of the fuel quantity in each internal wing.

Dump Switch

This two-position switch is in the NORM position when dumping is not in
progress. When DUMP is selected, it is electrically held to allow for
automatic dumping operations. The fuel dump system allows you to
automatically dump fuel to either the quantity set with the bingo bug or
approximately 2750 lbs (feed tank fuel), whichever is greater. The BINGO
FUEL caution, by design, causes the dump switch to physically return to
the NORM position. Be aware that there are known instances of this not
happening. The aircrew should confirm that the switch is in the NORM
position and visually confirm that dumping has stopped. Of course,
manually selecting NORM also terminates dumping. Fuel dump rate is
approximately 910 PPM (pounds per minute). The uneven dump rates of
the internal tanks (left internal wing 260 PPM, tank 1 260 PPM, right
internal wing 390 PPM) creates an internal wing lateral fuel imbalance of
130 PPM (1100 pounds maximum). The asymmetry will remain until all
the internal wing fuel is depleted (dumped or transferred) or the tanks are
refilled.

Slipway Switch

The slipway switch (Figure D-11) controls air refueling functions. It is
discussed later in the air refueling section.

Conformal Tank Emergency Transfer Switch

The conformal tank emergency transfer switch is discussed later in the
malfunction section.

ACG-3 D-18


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_25.jpeg:
Fuel Shutoff Valves

A fuel shutoff valve is located in each fuel line, aft of the heat exchanger
and forward of the engine main fuel control (Figure D-12). It is normally
open but can be electrically closed (in 2-3 seconds) by turning the
appropriate engine master switch off or by pushing the associated fire
push light in the front cockpit. It provides an alternate fuel shutoff
capability to the main fuel control (throttles) and is also further upstream
in the system. This is important to consider in case of a fuel leak.

ENGINE 5
FUEL
MAIN
FU EL BURN THRU. BURN THRU
CONTROL = =s

ENGINE

Fuel Shutoff Valve.

ACG-03-12

Figure D - 12.

ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_26.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. List the capacity of the following fuel tanks (JP-8):

Left feed tank ___lbs
Right feed tank ___lbs
Tank 1 ___lbs
Internal wing tank ____lbs each
External wing tank ____lbs each
CFT ____lbs each

2. List the major components of the fuel system.
a.

b.

3. Describe the normal airborne fuel transfer sequence.

4. The airframe mounted fuel shutoff valves are normally open; they
can be closed by using the or

ACG-3 D - 20


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_27.jpeg:
List the fuel tanks that make up each of the 3 stages of the
transfer/feed system:

a. First level - external transfer

b. Second level - internal transfer

c. Third level - engine feed

Placing the conformal fuel tank control switch to STOP TRANS
causes ; however, if the FUEL LOW indication
comes on, fuel transfer from the CFTs as long as the
fuel low condition exists.

D-21 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_28.jpeg:
ANSWERS

1. Left feed tank 1250 lbs
Right feed tank 1550 lbs
Tank 1 4050 lbs
Internal wing tank 3300 lbs each
External wing tank 4100 lbs each
CFT 4900 lbs each

2. a. External fuel tanks
b. Conformal fuel tanks
c. Internal transfer tanks
d. Feed tanks
e. Transfer pumps
f. Boost pumps
g. Heat exchangers
h. Fuel shutoff valves
I. Fuel lines
j. Pressurization and vent system

3. External fuel tanks followed by CFTs; then simultaneously from each
internal wing tank and tank 1; then both feed tanks to their
respective engine.

4. Engine fire push lights, engine master switches

5. a. First level - external transfer
External tanks (Wing, center)
Conformal fuel tanks (Left, right)

b. Second level - internal transfer
Internal wing tanks (Left, right)
Tank 1

c. Third level - engine feed
Left feed tank
Right feed tank

6. CFT fuel transfer to stop; resumes

ACG-3 D - 22


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_29.jpeg:
Ground Refueling

Ground refueling is accomplished through the single point receptacle
under the left engine intake. No electrical power is required for the
operation. The external tanks can be refueled separately, if required.
Procedures exist for refueling with the engines running (“hot refueling”).

Air Refueling

Fuel can be taken onboard from a KC-135 or KC-10 through the air
refueling receptacle which is beneath the slipway door. This assembly is
located on top of the left engine inlet just aft of the rear cockpit area. It
consists of the door, the receptacle, area lighting (slipway and flood) and a
pressure switch. The cockpit controls and indicators consist of a READY
light, the slipway switch, an emergency air refueling switch (Figure D-13)
and an air refueling release button on each stick grip (Figure D-14).

D - 238 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_3.jpeg:
AIRCRAFT GENERAL

COVER

FUEL SYSTEM
INTRODUCTION

This workbook is your guide in studying the F-15E Fuel System. It
familiarizes you with the components, nomenclature and operating
characteristics of the fuel system and provides knowledge needed to safely
operate the aircraft.

CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION 0.000. eeecceeeseeeeseeceseeesesaeecessaeeessaeesessaeesesneeeeneas A-1
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs).........0..eeeeeeeeeees B-1
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS ...00.. eee eeeeee C-1
TEXT oe cecccccceessseeeceessseeecceessaeeeccesssseeeseessaeeeceeesaeeeseeesaeeesensaaeees D-1
END QE TEXT QUIG sess cscs cess sows sues susan seins see ose ones sass suivs seve sere ans wee snows ses su E-1
GLOSSARY. eeeccceesceeceseeeesseeecesacecesaeeessaeesesaeecesaeesessaeesesaeesenaees F-1

A-1 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_30.jpeg:
WING CTR CONF TANK
STOP TRANS

NI, NORM NORM SL

STOP REFUEL

DUMP
SLIPWAY

NORM
CONF TANK EXT TRANS
EMERG TRANS | CONF TANK

EMER A/R SWITCH ACG-03-13

Figure D - 13. Air Refueling Components.

ACG-3 D - 24


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_31.jpeg:
AIR REFUELING
RELEASE (ARR)

FRONT COCKPIT REAR COCKPIT

ACG-03-14

Figure D - 14. Air Refueling Release/Disconnect (ARR) Switch.

The 3-position slipway switch is the primary air refueling control. Its
positions and related functions are:

OPEN

Moving the switch to this position turns off the transfer pumps
in the CFTs and in tank 1, hydraulically opens the door, and if
the door opens, depressurizes the external tanks (if the fuel low
caution is not on) and turns on the exterior refueling lights. The
READY light also comes on indicating the system is ready to
accept the tanker's refueling boom.

When the boom contacts the receptacle, the locking mechanism
engages, the READY light goes out and fuel is transferred at a
maximum rate of about 3000 lbs/minute. For CG control a float
switch located in tank 1 prevents the external tanks from being
filled until tank 1 contains at least 1560 lbs. The CFTs will
start refilling, regardless of tank 1 fuel quantity.

D-25 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_32.jpeg:
CLOSE

ORIDE

ACG-3

The boom remains engaged until either the boom limits are
exceeded (at which time it automatically disconnects) or the
crew or boomer manually initiate a disconnect. The crew can
initiate manual disconnect by depressing the air refueling
release button on either stick grip. At this time the system
automatically recycles (takes about 3-5 seconds) and the READY
light again comes on.

Going to this position turns on the transfer pumps in the CFTs
(CFT transfer switch in NORM) and in tank 1, closes the
slipway door, repressurizes the external tanks, reestablishes
fuel sequencing and turns off exterior refueling lights and the
READY light.

This position is similar to OPEN but may allow refueling when
certain malfunctions exist. The two differences are that the
automatic disconnect and tanker initiated manual disconnect is
lost (the F-15E crew must initiate all disconnects) and the float
switch in tank 1 is bypassed. To prevent an undesirable CG
condition select STOP REFUEL for the external tanks until
tank 1 fuel quantity is above 1560 lbs. ORIDE should not be
used during normal peacetime operations unless refueling is
critical due to a low fuel state.


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_33.jpeg:
Emergency Air Refueling

If you have to air refuel and the slipway door does not open normally (for
example, utility hydraulic failure), there is a backup. With the slipway
switch in OPEN, place the emergency air refueling switch to OPEN. This
fires a pyrotechnic device, blowing the slipway door open. The slipway
lights and the READY light illuminate; however, the READY light will not
go out nor will the boom lock in place. “Pressure” refueling must be
accomplished. The door cannot be closed, but the external tanks can be
pressurized and tank 1 and CFT transfer pumps are made available by
putting the normal slipway switch to CLOSE.

Fuel Dumping

All fuel but that in the feed tanks can be dumped overboard through a
dump mast located on the trailing edge of the right wing tip. Placing the
dump switch to DUMP opens the valve and allows the transfer pumps and
engine bleed air to force the fuel out at a rate of about 910 lbs/minute.
Dumping will stop when (1) the dump switch is returned to NORM; (2)
only fuel in the feed tanks remains, even with the switch still in DUMP;
(3) the pointer on the fuel quantity indicator reaches the bingo bug, which
returns the solenoid-held dump switch to NORM. One thing to keep in
mind—you can dump fuel on the ground just like in the air. All you need is
electrical power and the switch in DUMP. This is not a guarded switch, so
avoid inadvertent selection of the DUMP position.

NOTE

The right internal wing tank’s 20 gpm faster dumping rate produces an
internal wing tank imbalance (left wing heavy condition) of
approximately 130 lbs per minute of dumping to a maximum of about

1100 pounds (when the right internal wing tank is empty). The fuel
imbalance will decrease as fuel in the left internal wing tank is depleted
from below 1100 pounds to empty.

D-27 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_34.jpeg:
MALFUNCTIONS
Uncommanded Fuel Venting/Fuel Leak

These two malfunctions have no special warning or caution indicators,
and can be quite insidious. The fuel quantity being much lower than
planned at a certain mission point or excessive fuel flow may be the only
indication until FUEL LOW appears. In the case of venting, you or a
wingman should notice the spray, in most conditions. The greatest danger
comes from not being able to reach a recovery base; and in the case of a
leak, possible in-flight fire/explosion. Refer to the checklist for the
appropriate procedures.

Cautions and Warnings

There are eight different caution indications that apply to the fuel system.
When the conditions for activation are met, one or more of the following
occurs: a yellow caution light illuminates on the FCP (and, in some cases,
RCP) caution panel; a caution message appears on the appropriate
MPD/MPCD; a voice warning message is sent to both cockpits. When any
of these occur, the master caution lights in the front and rear cockpits also
illuminate.

The fuel cautions are: BINGO FUEL, FUEL LOW, FUEL HOT, EMER
BST ON, BST SYS MAL, L BST PUMP, R BST PUMP and XFER PUMP.
Conditions relating to the BINGO caution have been described previously.
The caution indications that occur for a certain malfunction and the
specific condition that activates each of the cautions will be presented in
the next section. Refer to the checklist in all cases.

ACG-3 D - 28


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_35.jpeg:
Fuel Low

Fuel low indications warn you of a low fuel level in one or both engine feed
tanks. The system is completely independent of the fuel quantity
indicating system and responds to sensors in each feed tank (Figure D-15).
The FUEL LOW caution light (both cockpits) and a voice warning which
says “WARNING, FUEL LOW” are activated when you have about 1600
lbs total feed tank fuel remaining. The sensors are exposed with less than
1000 lbs in the right feed tank or 600 lbs in the left feed tank. If transfer
falls behind engine consumption, the system can activate with fuel
remaining in other tanks; and in some high transfer situations, fuel spray
may wet the sensors inhibiting the cautions. When FUEL LOW comes on,
fuel will transfer from the external tanks and CFTs, even with STOP
TRANS selected on the fuel control panel. FUEL LOW overrides the
landing gear handle and external tanks fuel will be transferred with the
landing gear handle down. FUEL LOW also overrides the slipway switch
for external tank pressurization/fuel transfer. It will not, however, turn
on the tank 1 transfer pump or the CFT transfer pumps if the slipway
switch is in OPEN or ORIDE.

FUEL
LOW
LEVEL

1000 LBS IN 600 LBS IN
RIGHT TANK OR LEFT TANK

ACG-03-15

Figure D - 15. Fuel Low Conditions.

Fuel Hot

A FUEL HOT caution on the MPD/MPCD indicates that the temperature
of the engine feed fuel is too high and recirculation to the wings has failed
to reduce the temperature to prevent vaporization. Advancing the
throttles to a higher power setting (but not afterburner) to get higher fuel
flow should help extinguish the FUEL HOT caution. If this caution
remains on more than 5 minutes on the ground, abort the mission.

D - 29 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_36.jpeg:
Transfer Malfunctions

External Tanks

If electrical power is lost, fuel still transfers since no electrical pumps are
involved. However, if engine bleed air is shut off, the fuel remaining in
the external tanks is trapped. The ram air fuel pressurization backup
capability provides only about 2-5 psi pressurization. This is insufficient
for external tank pressurization/fuel transfer, as the normal engine bleed
air for fuel pressurization provides about 25 psi for external wing tank
fuel transfer and 15 psi for external centerline tank fuel transfer.

If other tanks begin to transfer before the externals show empty in their
proper sequence, or if the wing externals indicate significant imbalance, a
transfer problem is possible. No cautions appear and any fuel that does
not transfer is trapped. Normally, landing with one full and one empty
external wing tank presents no significant problems. If CG, flight control
malfunctions, or other factors warrant, the tank(s) may be jettisoned.

Internal Transfer Tanks and/or CFTs

A “Warning, Transfer Pump” voice warning and a “XFER Pump”
MPD/MPCD caution come on if an internal wing or CFT transfer pump
fails. However, the fuel quantity gauge readings are the primary means
of detecting transfer problems. By monitoring the tanks that are
transferring, you have the best chance of catching a malfunction early. In
each case refer to the appropriate section of the checklist for the
procedures. There is no caution/warning for a tank 1 transfer pump
failure. If the aircrew does not monitor the tank 1 fuel quantity, they will
be unaware of a tank 1 transfer pump failure until a premature “FUEL
LOW” alerts them that there is a fuel transfer problem.

Emergency Transfer

Each transfer tank has backup capability that varies among the types of
tank.

ACG-3 D - 30


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_37.jpeg:
Emergency Fuel Transfer/Dump (External Tanks), Gear Down

While this is not a malfunction, doing it probably comes from being
involved in an emergency situation. As previously stated, with the gear
handle down, bleed air pressure is removed from the external tanks and
external fuel cannot be transferred/dumped normally. If you must
transfer/dump external tank fuel, pulling the emergency gear handle to
keep the gear down then raising the normal landing gear handle
pressurizes the external tanks, but the landing gear remains extended.

CFTs

If a CFT pump fails, the voice warning (““WARNING, TRANSFER PUMP”)
and XFER PUMP MPD/MPCD caution indicate a pump malfunction.
Cycling the CFT transfer switch to STOP TRANS confirms a CFT problem
if the caution goes out. If the caution remains on, the failure involves an
internal wing transfer pump. Reference the fuel gauge to determine the
specific problem. As each CFT has two pumps, losing one decreases the
transfer rate, while losing both traps any fuel remaining in the tank
(Figure D-16).
REFUELING

CONTROL 7
VALVE LEFT CONFORMAL FUEL TANK (CFT)

CENTER
COMPARTMENT

FORWARD
COMPARTMENT

AFT
COMPARTMENT

FORWARD TRANSFER REFUELING
COMPARTMENT INTERCONNECT CONTROL
EJECTOR PUMP VALVE VALVE

ACG-03-16

Figure D - 16. Conformal Fuel Tank.

NOTE

On aircraft 90-233 and up, after TCTO 6J14-5-11-521, the ejector pump
is moved to the aft compartment.

D-31 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_38.jpeg:
Emergency Transfer—CFT

This three-position switch (Figure D-17), labeled CONF TANK EMERG
TRANS, is only functional in the absence of main generator power. It is
normally positioned in the center (NORM) position. With both generators
off and/or failed, the CFT transfer pumps are unpowered. Moving this
switch to the L or R position powers the left or right CFT center transfer
pump (emergency generator power). The L/R positions also turn off all
aircraft pitot heaters to limit the drain on the emergency generator. The
emergency CFT transfer procedure involves depleting the internal fuel to
about 1000 pounds below full, then filling the internal tanks alternately
from the left and right CFTs. If the gear is down the fuel may simply
transfer between the two CFTs rather than to the internal tanks.

WING CTR CONF TANK
STOP TRANS

STOP REFUEL

DUMP
= SLIPWAY
(HA) ORIDE
~~

CONF TANK EXT TRANS
EMERG TRANS § CONF TANK

O03! 0
WING/CTR CLOSE

ACG-03-17

Figure D - 17. Conformal Tank Emergency Transfer Switch.

Internal Wing Tanks

If an internal wing tank pump fails, the voice warning, “WARNING,
TRANSFER PUMP,” and XFER PUMP MPD/MPCD caution indicate a
pump malfunction. Cycling the CFT transfer switch to STOP TRANS
confirms an internal wing tank transfer pump failure if the caution
remains on. Reference the fuel gauge to further identify the problem.
Substantially more fuel in one internal wing tank than the other, or more
in either wing than tank 1 confirms an internal wing pump failure. In
either case, fuel will eventually gravity transfer. However, a significant
lateral imbalance (up to 3300 pounds) can occur before this happens.

ACG-3 D - 32


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_39.jpeg:
Internal Transfer Tanks

With internal transfer pump failure (tank 1 or internal wing), fuel gravity
transfers from that tank at a reduced rate, and only after the other
transfer tanks are empty. It flows through the gravity transfer lines
depending upon the fuel level difference in the tanks (Figure D-18). You
can help the gravity transfer of fuel from tank 1 (should the need arise) by
maintaining a 3° to 7° nose-up pitch attitude, allowing the fuel to run
downhill. Any loss of internal transfer pump(s) reduces the transfer rate;
and, although it should be sufficient for normal cruise, it may be
insufficient to keep up with high engine demand. With no transfer pumps
operating (for example, double main generator failure), fuel will gravity
transfer at a maximum rate of 3500 PPH per engine.

NORMAL TRANSFER SYSTEM GRAVITY TRANSFER SYSTEM

TRANSFER / FEED

TRANSFER ae
PUMP é

TO

BOOST LEFT WING
PUMP TANK PUMP TANK

TRANSFER
PUMP ACG-03-18

Figure D - 18. Gravity Transfer.

D - 33 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_4.jpeg:
CRITERION REFERENCED OBJECTIVES (CROs)

1. Identify the capacity of each fuel tank.
2. Identify normal fuel system operation.
3. Identify the operating limitations of major fuel system components.

4. Given cockpit fuel indicator depictions, interpret fuel quantities that
indicate normal readings or fuel transfer problems.

5. Given caution indications, identify fuel system malfunctions.

6. Identify fuel system abnormal/emergency operations and corrective

actions.
REFERENCES
TO 1F-15E-1 Section I Aircraft Fuel System
Section IT Normal Procedures
Section III Fuel System Emergencies
Section V Operating Limitations

a. Alternate Fuel
b. Systems Restrictions -
External Fuel Transfer

c. Negative G Flight

d. Prohibited Maneuvers,
General

e. Center of Gravity
Limitations

ACG-3 B-1


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_40.jpeg:
Tank 1

A transfer pump failure in tank 1 is probable if the difference between the
higher tank 1 quantity and the internal wing tank quantities exceeds 750
pounds (550 +200). Again, no cautions appear. However, the aircraft is
now restricted to 30 units AOA. The fuel is still usable as it will
eventually gravity transfer, but only after the internal wing tanks are
empty.

Lateral Tank Imbalances

The maximum imbalance between the CFTs is expected to be no more
than 500 lbs. If a sustained imbalance of 1000 lbs or more exists for more
than 5 minutes, it is a discrepancy, requiring a 781 writeup.

If a sustained imbalance between the left and right internal wing tanks of
200 lbs or more exists for more than five minutes, it is a discrepancy. Ifa
fuel asymmetry between left and right readings for the total of both
internal wing tanks and CFTs is over 600 lbs, then the aircraft is
restricted to 30 units AOA.

ACG-3 D - 34


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_41.jpeg:
Boost Pump Malfunctions

Single Boost Pump Failure

Indications of this malfunction are a L BST PUMP or R BST PUMP and
an EMER BST ON caution displayed on an MPD/MPCD in both cockpits.
Also the EMER BST ON caution panel light illuminates (FCP only)
(Figure D-19). The reason for these indications is that one of the main
boost pumps (left or right) has failed or is putting out insufficient
pressure. The EMER BST ON means that the emergency boost pump has
come on and is being powered by the emergency generator. You still have
two boost pumps providing pressurized fuel to the engines. Refer to the
checklist for the procedure, but, in short, do not use afterburner and land
as soon as practical.

EME

ACG-03-19

OR L BST PMP

Figure D - 19. Single Boost Pump Failure (Right Boost Pump).

D- 35 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_42.jpeg:
Double Boost Pump Failure

If the L BST PUMP and R BST PUMP cautions appear together, or if
either appears with the BST SYS MAL caution (no EMER BST ON), you
have a double boost pump failure (Figure D-20). In the first case the
EMER BST ON will also be displayed, indicating the emergency boost
pump is working. In the second instance, BST SYS MAL without the
EMER BST ON indicates that the emergency boost pump has failed or is
not providing sufficient pressure. Now only one pump (either a main
boost pump or the emergency boost pump) is boosting fuel to the engines.
However, this should be enough to keep the engines running at all
nonafterburner power settings below 30,000 feet. Refer to the checklist
for the procedure.

EMER BST ON

L BST PMP R_BST PMP EMER BST ON

ACG-03-20

Figure D - 20. Double Boost Failure (Left and Right).

ACG-3 D - 36


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_43.jpeg:
Total Boost Pump Failure

In this situation you should see the L BST PUMP, R BST PUMP and BST
SYS MAL cautions displayed (Figure D-21). The engines are “sucking”
fuel from the feed tanks and it is probable that one or both will flame out.
Descend to minimum practical altitude using maximum practical power
(nonafterburner) on at least one engine. Refer to the checklist for the
procedures.

BST SYS MAL

M
LBSTPMP __RBSTPMP_ BST SYS MAL
Ta

ACG-03-21

Figure D - 21. Total Boost Pump Failure.

D - 37 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_44.jpeg:
QUESTIONS

1. Describe emergency/backup transfer operations for external tanks,
CFTs and internal tanks.

2. List the possible caution indications for double boost pump failure.

3. List the actions that normally occur when the slipway switch is
placed to OPEN.

4. Fuel dumping will stop when:

a.

ACG-3 D - 38


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_45.jpeg:
ANSWERS

External tanks loss of electrical power—no problem

loss of bleed air—no transfer, fuel trapped

CFT lose one transfer pump-transfer at a reduced
rate
lose both pumps-—fuel trapped
Internal lose transfer pump-gravity transfer
MPD/MPCD CAUTION LIGHT MASTER
(FCP Only) CAUTION
a. LBST PMP EMER BST ON ON
R BST PMP
EMER BST ON
b. LBST PMP BST SYS MAL ON
BST SYS MAL
c. RBST PMP BST SYS MAL ON
BST SYS MAL

Turns off tank 1 and CFT transfer pumps, opens slipway door, and if
the door opens, depressurizes the external tanks, and turns on the
AAR exterior lights and the READY light.

a.
b.
c.

dump switch placed to NORM

only feed tank fuel remains

internal fuel indication pointer decreases to bingo bug position
(which returns the dump switch to the NORM position).

D- 39 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_46.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-3 D - 40


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_47.jpeg:
END OF TEXT QUIZ

Normal external drop tank and internal fuel tank pressurization is

provided by ; CFTs are pressurized by

a. ram air, engine bleed air

b. ram air, JFS accumulator pressure

c. engine bleed air, ram air

d. engine bleed air, JFS accumulator pressure

The FUEL LOW warning is normally activated at what total feed
tank fuel quantity?

a. 1200 +200
b. 1600 +200
c. 1800 +200
d. 2000 +200

When the internal fuel quantity pointer reaches the value to which
the BINGO bug is set, which of the following will occur?

a. BINGO FUEL appears on the MPD/MPCD along with the
MASTER CAUTIONS and voice warning.
. Fuel dumping (if in progress) continues.
c. System overrides a STOP TRANS selection and external tanks
transfer.
d. Gravity transfer begins.

With the F-15E filled with full (JP-8) internal fuel and full CFTs, the
fuel quantity gages should read internal and total.

17,400, 23,300
13,550, 17,400
17,400, 17,400
13,550, 23,300

pe op

E-1 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_48.jpeg:
5. You observe the following cautions:

L BST PMP and EMER BST ON on an MPD/MPCD, EMER BST ON
on the FCP caution lights panel, MASTER CAUTION.

This indicates:

single boost pump failure.
double boost pump failure.
total boost pump failure.
emergency generator failure.

ae op

6. After the external tanks go dry during normal fuel system operation,

the transfer(s) next.

a. CFTs

b. right internal wing tank
c. left internal wing tank
d. tank1

7. Fuel transfer malfunctions can best be detected by

a. the fuel quantity gauge.
b. the voice warning.
c. caution indications.
d. CG problems.
8. All fuel except can be dumped overboard.
a. feed tank fuel
b. internal fuel
c. external tank fuel
d. 2000 lbs

ACG-3 E-2


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_49.jpeg:
10.

11.

Conformal fuel tanks can transfer fuel to

a. _ the feed tanks.

b. tank 1.

c. the internal wing tanks.
All of the above.

What could occur if the engines do not get boosted fuel?

Engine flameout
Uncommanded fuel leak
Engine explosion
Uncommanded fuel venting

ao op

Determine the correct situation from the fuel gauge readings (Figure
F-1).

The external tanks are full.

The right feed tank has an invalid reading.

The right internal wing has 1100 lbs more than the left.
Tank 1 total fuel is 3100 lbs.

po op

FUEL QTY

TOTAL LBS

(0/0

LBS
0)

TANK |
INTL WING ‘\. WING
FEED EXT CTR
+

/ \ CONF
BIT TANK

ACG-3-22

Figure F - 1.

E-3 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_5.jpeg:
STUDENT PREPARATION REQUIREMENTS
BEFORE CLASS

1. Study the information in this workbook and complete the End of
Text Quiz.

2. Read the referenced material in TO 1F-15E-1.

C-1 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_50.jpeg:
12. Determine the correct situation from the fuel gauge readings (Figure

F-2).

a. Each CFT has about 2300 lbs remaining.

b. Some fuel remains in one or more external tank(s).
c. The BINGO caution should be displayed.

d. The readings indicate a gauge problem.

FUEL QTY

OTAL LBS

0 LBS
®

TANK |
INTL WING ‘\. WING
FEED
& +
BIT CONF

ACG-03-23

Figure F - 2.

ACG-3 E-4


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_51.jpeg:
AOA

ARR

BAL

BST

CFT

CG

ECS

IDG

GLOSSARY
Air-to-air refueling
Angle of attack
Air refueling release (disconnect)
Basic aircraft limit
Boost (pump, system)
Conformal fuel tank
Center of gravity
Environmental control system
Integrated drive generator

Transfer (tank, pump)

ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_52.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-3 F-2


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_6.jpeg:
(This Page Intentionally Blank)

ACG-3 C-2


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_7.jpeg:
TEXT

CAPABILITIES & LIMITATIONS
Capabilities

The tanks and lines have been designed to be damage resistant, being
either self-sealing and/or containing polyether-based foam for
fire/explosion protection. This new type of foam does not break down over
time and contaminate the fuel (as with previously used types of foam).

Fuel lines are routed inside the tanks where possible, and when routed
outside the tanks, are self-sealing. The fuselage fuel tanks are
surrounded (sides and bottom) with explosion suppression polyether foam.

With a maximum fuel load the F-15E has the advantages of extended
range, increased combat mission flexibility and sustained afterburner
operations. This fuel load would typically give the aircraft a combat
radius of 450 nm in an air-to-ground profile carrying a mix of bombs and
missiles. On a cross country with maximum fuel load, the aircraft is
capable of 2000 plus mile legs (depending on in-flight winds and fuel
reserve requirements).

Limitations

The engines can use fuel at a tremendous rate. At low altitude in full AB,
total fuel flow can exceed 150,000 lbs per hour. Maximum transfer rate,
at best, is only 117,000 lbs per hour. The potential to empty the engine
feed tanks and flameout with fuel still onboard exists!

When fuel system malfunctions occur, restrictions to the aircraft operating

envelope apply. Specific restrictions are discussed in the malfunctions
section of this workbook.

D-1 ACG-3


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_8.jpeg:
CAPACITIES

The F-15E can have quite a variety of fuel loads depending on what tanks
are installed and what the mission requirements are. To be able to
interpret the fuel gauge and determine if the fuel system is operating
properly, you need to know the capacity of each type of tank.

The following is a list of fuel tank quantities using 6.7 lb/gal of JP-8 as the
standard (at 65° Fahrenheit).

Tank 1 about 4050 lbs
Right feed (Tank 2) about 1550 lbs
Left feed (Tank 3) about 1250 lbs
Internal wings about 3300 lbs each
CFT about 4900 lbs each
Externals about 4100 lbs each

A little addition shows that with conformal fuel tanks (CFTs) and three
external tanks loaded there is about 35,550 lbs of fuel available. That is
about nine T-38s full. Here are some examples of fuel loads you might
see:

Full internal only about 13,550 lbs
Full internal plus CFTs about 23,300 lbs
Full internal, CFTs and

external centerline tank about 27,350 lbs

You have the capability to go a long way without refueling. The aircraft
feels and handles differently throughout the course of the mission because
of changing fuel quantities that affect aircraft gross weight and center of
gravity (CG).

ACG-3 D-2


Text from ACG-3_Fuel_System_page_9.jpeg:
DESCRIPTION AND COMPONENTS

The F-15E can carry about as much fuel as it weighs. Fuel is located
internally in feed tanks and transfer tanks. Additional fuel is carried in
external wing/centerline tanks and conformal fuel tanks (CFTs) (Figure
D-1). All tanks may be refueled on the ground or in the air. All fuel
except that in the feed tanks may be dumped overboard. The primary fuel
is JP-8, but some other fuel types may be used if required. Fuel flow and
performance may vary slightly with other types of fuel.

ACG-03-01

Figure D- 1. F-15E Fuel System.

D-3 ACG-3


